# Active Wind Rejection Control for a Quadrotor UAV Against Unknown Winds,.pdf

## Page 1

Active Wind Rejection Control
for a Quadrotor UAV Against
Unknown Winds
ZHEWEN XING
YOUMIN ZHANG
, Fellow, IEEE
CHUN-YI SU
, Senior Member, IEEE
Concordia University, Montreal, QC, Canada
This article presents an active wind rejection control scheme for
a quadrotor unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) against unknown winds.
Basedontheestimatedwindeffectsactingontheaircraft,theproposed
control scheme can maintain the performance of the quadrotor UAV
in the presence of model uncertainties, unknown winds, and system
noises. Firstly, a two-stage particle ﬁlter is designed to estimate the
UAV states and wind information from the motion of the vehicle
without additional wind sensors. Then, an active wind rejection con-
trol scheme is proposed to actively attenuate the wind disturbances
based on the estimated wind information. In the controller design,
the nonsingular terminal sliding-mode control (NTSMC) is chosen as
the baseline controller. To tackle the issues of model uncertainties and
wind estimation errors, the adaptive drag coefﬁcients are adopted to
generate the compensation control signals. Finally, simulation results
are presented to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed active
wind rejection control scheme for a quadrotor UAV against unknown
winds.
Manuscript received 11 September 2022; revised 2 February 2023 and 19
May 2023; accepted 3 September 2023. Date of publication 14 September
2023; date of current version 8 December 2023.
DOI. No. 10.1109/TAES.2023.3315254
Refereeing of this contribution was handled by H.-S. Shin.
This work was supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Re-
search Council of Canada.
Author’s addresses: Zhewen Xing, Youmin Zhang, and Chun-Yi Su
are with the Department of Mechanical, Industrial and Aerospace En-
gineering, Concordia University, Montreal, QC H3G 1M8, Canada,
E-mail:
(x_zhewen@encs.concordia.ca;
youmin.zhang@concordia.ca;
chun-yi.su@concordia.ca). (Corresponding author: Youmin Zhang.)
0018-9251 © 2023 IEEE
I.
INTRODUCTION
Wind behaviors have considerable impacts on un-
manned aerial vehicles (UAVs) in a lot of outdoor tasks.
The precise and agile control schemes must be considered
to ensure the performance of UAVs in the strong and un-
predictable wind environments [1], [2]. For example, when
being employed in the applications of forest ﬁre detection,
monitoring, and ﬁghting, UAVs require to closely track
designate trajectories to collect ﬁre information within the
hazardous ﬁre region against unknown winds. The adverse
forces and moments generated by the external wind distur-
bances may degrade the performance of UAVs and even
result in serious accidents if appropriate reactions are not
promptly activated to attenuate the wind effects. Especially,
quadrotor UAVs are more sensitive to those external distur-
bances due to their small sizes and light weights. Therefore,
it is necessary to investigate the effective wind rejection
control for UAVs to ensure their ﬂight performance in the
presence of unknown winds.
In recent years, lots of efforts have been invested in
developing the control strategies of UAVs against wind dis-
turbances. The robust control strategies are usually adopted
to attenuate wind disturbances. However, robust control
methods always have a high degree of conservativeness
for the external disturbances, which are deﬁned by norm
bounded variables [3]. In [4], two robust nonlinear sliding-
mode controllers are designed in the presence of wind
perturbations. A switching model predictive attitude con-
trol is adopted for the quadrotor UAV against wind gust
disturbances based on a piecewise afﬁne model [5]. The
L1 backstepping trajectory tracking control is developed
to allow for the fast adaption to rapidly varying model
uncertainties and wind disturbances [6]. In [7], a robust
nonlinear dynamic inversion attitude controller is proposed
in the presence of model uncertainties and wind gust dis-
turbances, aerodynamic interactions with nearby structures
and ground effects, while a feedback position controller is
used to handle the lateral and vertical transitions. In [8], the
ﬁnite frequency H∞control is used for the attitude stabiliza-
tion, while the PID-based H∞loop shaping control is used
for the linear motion in the presence of wind disturbances.
An acceleration feedback enhanced H∞control is adopted
against wind disturbances in [9].
To improve the performance of the UAV system against
wind disturbances, unknown wind effects acting on the
UAV dynamics should be estimated and considered in the
generation of control signals [10]. To achieve this purpose,
disturbance estimation and control techniques are required
to be investigated, such as disturbance-observer-based con-
trol, active disturbance rejection control, embedded model
control, and composite hierarchical antidisturbance control.
Chen et al. [11] proposed a detailed review of disturbance
observers. In [12], a high-gain residual observer is im-
plemented in an embedded robust attitude control of a
quadrotor UAV for online estimation and compensation of
wind gust disturbances. In [13], a multiple observers-based
8956
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS
VOL. 59, NO. 6
DECEMBER 2023
Authorized licensed use limited to: Netaji Subhas University of Technology New Delhi. Downloaded on April 04,2026 at 08:00:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

## Page 2

antidisturbance control is applied for a quadrotor UAV.
A composite disturbance observer and an extended state
observerareusedinthepositionlooptomitigatethepayload
and wind disturbances, while an extended state observer is
used in the attitude loop to reject modeling uncertainties
and wind disturbances. In [14], an attitude control for a
UAV quadrotor is developed in the framework of active
disturbance rejection control and embedded model control
to estimate and reject the disturbances. In view of the idea of
composite hierarchical antidisturbance control, an adaptive
composite disturbance rejection control is developed, con-
taining active disturbance rejection control and disturbance
observer, for attitude control of the agricultural quadrotor
UAV [15].
In addition, the deep-learning-based control approaches
have become increasingly attractive in recent years. To
improve the performance of the UAV against wind dis-
turbances, the deep-learning-based approach is usually
adopted to learn the unknown aerodynamic representation
of the aircraft. In [16], a deep-learning-based trajectory
trackingcontrollerisdevelopedtolearnforquicklyadapting
torapidlychangingwindconditions.Tothisend,thedomain
adversarially invariant meta-learning algorithm is devel-
oped for the ofﬂine learning of the common aerodynamic
representation, while a composite adaption law is used to
update wind-speciﬁc linear coefﬁcients.
However, to the best of the authors’ knowledge, the
control accuracy of a quadrotor UAV should still be in-
vestigated in the presence of strong winds. The precise
control of a quadrotor UAV in rapidly changing wind
environments requires an accurate and prompt perception
of the ambient winds [17], [18]. In most cases, the high-
frequency and low-latency observers are used to estimate
the lumped disturbance of the quadrotor UAV, including
the model uncertainties and external wind disturbances,
but they may not take quick and accurate responses to
the rapidly changing winds. Therefore, the existing control
strategies may not ensure the accuracy of the stationary and
transient control of a quadrotor UAV against strong winds.
In addition, the system noises of a quadrotor UAV cannot be
zero in the practical engineering applications. The existing
control strategies may not work perfectly or even diverge in
consideration of the stochastic system noises.
The sliding-mode control method is often adopted to
maintain the tracking performance of a quadrotor UAV,
due to its inherent robustness to model uncertainties and
disturbances. In [19], an adaptive fault-tolerant control
based on a multivariable integral terminal sliding-mode
control (TSMC) is developed in the presence of parametric
uncertainties and actuator faults. An adaptive super-twisting
sliding-mode control is adopted for a quadrotor UAV to
track a desired trajectory under gust winds [20]. An adaptive
backstepping global sliding-mode control is offered for a
quadrotor UAV in the existence of model uncertainty, wind
perturbation, and input saturation [21]. In [22], the position
and attitude control of a quadrotor UAV is realized by an
optimized fuzzy-based sliding-mode control.
Compared with the conventional SMC, the TSMC can
offer ﬁnite-time convergence. However, the TSMC schemes
have the singularity problem. To eliminate the singularity
and guarantee the global ﬁnite-time stability of nonlin-
ear systems, the nonsingular terminal sliding-mode con-
trol (NTSMC) method is developed in [23]. Furthermore,
NTSMC schemes are adopted in the control of a quadrotor
UAV in the presence of external disturbances (wind distur-
bances). In [24], a ﬁnite-time disturbance observer-based
NTSMC is proposed for a quadrotor UAV with external
disturbances. In [25], an NTSMC-based fault-tolerant con-
trol for a quadrotor UAV is proposed with the consideration
of model uncertainties and wind disturbances. In [26], an
adaptive nonsingular fast TSMC is adopted to stabilize
the attitude of a quadrotor UAV, while a robust backstep-
ping sliding-mode control is used to follow the prescribed
path.
Motivated by the aforementioned analysis, this article
proposes an active wind rejection control scheme for a
quadrotor UAV based on the NTSMC, which explicitly
considersthewindeffectsactingonthequadrotordynamics.
A two-stage particle ﬁlter (TSPF) is ﬁrst designed for the
estimation of UAV states and wind conditions from the mo-
tion of the quadrotor UAV without additional wind sensors.
Then, by combining an adaptive wind compensation with
the baseline NTSMC-based controller, the active wind re-
jection control scheme is developed to attenuate the external
wind disturbances. The main contributions of this article are
summarized as follows.
1) An active wind rejection control scheme is proposed
for a quadrotor UAV to accommodate unknown
wind disturbances and system noises. The proposed
scheme can obtain the estimation of UAV states
and winds from the TSPF, which can take a better
responsetotherapidlychangingwindconditionsand
reduce the noise effects in the control system.
2) A TSPF is adopted to estimate the UAV states and
wind conditions from quadrotor motion without ad-
ditional wind sensors. The proposed TSPF can ob-
tain the estimation from the posterior distribution of
samplings, thus solving the state and parameter esti-
mation problem for the nonlinear and non-Gaussian
system of a quadrotor UAV.
3) The adaptive drag coefﬁcients are designed to gener-
ate appropriate control signals as the compensation
for the model uncertainties and wind estimation er-
rors.
The rest of this article is organized as follows. Section II
outlines the preliminaries and problem statement. The ac-
tive wind rejection control scheme design and analysis are
presented in Section III. Section IV provides the simulation
results to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
scheme. Finally, Section V outlines the conclusion and
future work.
XING ET AL.: ACTIVE WIND REJECTION CONTROL FOR A QUADROTOR UAV AGAINST UNKNOWN WINDS
8957
Authorized licensed use limited to: Netaji Subhas University of Technology New Delhi. Downloaded on April 04,2026 at 08:00:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

## Page 3

Fig. 1.
Conﬁguration of a quadrotor UAV.
II.
PRELIMINARIES AND PROBLEM FORMULATION
A.
Quadrotor Dynamic Model With Wind Drags
Fig. 1 shows the general conﬁguration of a quadrotor
UAV. The motion of the vehicle is controlled by the thrusts
of four rotors Ti (i = 1, . . . , 4). In addition to the propulsion
system, the drag force of the airframe is one of the main
inﬂuential aerodynamic forces that affects the motion of the
vehicle.Thedragforcecanbeapproximatedasthefunctions
of the relative airspeed, i.e., the difference between the
wind speed and the ground speed of the vehicle in the
literature [27]. Since the quadrotor UAV operates at low
translational speed, the drag forces are approximated as
⎧
⎨
⎩
Fwx = Cdxy(ξx −˙x)

(ξx −˙x)2 + (ξy −˙y)2
Fwy = Cdxy(ξy −˙y)

(ξx −˙x)2 + (ξy −˙y)2
Fwz = Cdz(ξz −˙z)
(1)
where (Fwx, Fwy, Fwz) are the drag forces related to winds,
(Cdxy, Cdz) are the lateral and vertical drag coefﬁcients,
(˙x, ˙y, ˙z) represent the ground speeds of the vehicle, and
(ξx, ξy, ξz) are the wind components for each axis.
In general, the Newton–Euler equations are adopted to
describe the motion of the quadrotor UAV for the easy
understanding and expression. Nevertheless, the vehicle
should be protected from aggressive operations to avoid the
singularity issue. Without the consideration of the ground
effect and other proximity-related phenomena, the quadro-
tor dynamic model with wind drags is given by [27]
⎧
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩
¨x = −(cos φ sin θ cos ψ+sin φ sin ψ)Fz
m
+ Fwx
m + dx
m
¨y = −(cos φ sin θ sin ψ−sin φ cos ψ)Fz
m
+ Fwy
m + dy
m
¨z = −(cos φ cos θ)Fz
m
+ g + Fwz
m + dz
m
¨φ = Iy−Iz
Ix
˙θ ˙ψ + τφ
Ix + dφ
Ix
¨θ = Iz−Ix
Iy
˙φ ˙ψ + τθ
Iy + dθ
Iy
¨ψ = Ix−Iy
Iz
˙φ ˙θ + τψ
Iz + dψ
Iz
(2)
where (x, y, z) are the positions in the Earth-ﬁxed co-
ordinate system, (φ, θ, ψ) are the roll, pitch, and yaw
angles, (Fz, τφ, τθ, τψ ) are the control force (lift) and mo-
ments, (dx, dy, dz, dφ, dθ, dψ ) represent the unknown dis-
turbances, which are assumed to be bounded, i.e., |d| ≤D,
m is the mass of the quadrotor UAV, g is the gravity, and
(Ix, Iy, Iz) are the moment of inertia for each axis.
REMARK 1 In this article, the drag force of the airframe
is considered as the main external aerodynamic forces that
may affect the motion of the vehicle. Assuming that the
vehicle can maintain a stable ﬂight with small tilt angles
in the presence of unknown winds, the drag coefﬁcients
are reasonable to be set as constant values. It is assumed
that the states of the quadrotor UAV can be measured by
onboard sensors, such as the Global Positioning System
and the Inertial Measurement Unit. The distributions of the
measurement noises are assumed to be known. In addition,
the actuators of the quadrotor UAV are assumed to be ideal
and without delay.
B.
Control Objective
The control objective of this article is to design an active
wind rejection control scheme for the quadrotor UAV such
that the vehicle can maintain the tracking performance in the
presence of unknown wind disturbances and system noises.
III.
ACTIVE WIND REJECTION CONTROL SCHEME
DESIGN
In this section, an active wind rejection control scheme
is designed for a quadrotor UAV. The framework of the
proposed scheme is illustrated in Fig. 2. In the design of the
proposed control scheme, a TSPF-based estimator is ﬁrst
developed to estimate the UAV states and unknown wind
conditions from quadrotor motion with onboard sensors.
Then, an active wind rejection controller is designed to
attenuate the wind effects based on the estimated wind
conditions.
A.
TSPF for UAV State and Wind Estimation
In order to facilitate the design of the TSPF for the es-
timation of UAV states and wind disturbances, the artiﬁcial
wind evolution is modeled by the random walk process.
Therefore, the stochastic model of the quadrotor UAV is
given by
⎧
⎨
⎩
ξk ∼p(ξk|ξk−1)
χk ∼p(χk|χk−1, ξk)
ζk ∼p(ζk|χk)
(3)
where ξk, χk, and ζk represent the wind vector, the state
vector, and the measurement vector of a quadrotor UAV at
the time instant tk, respectively, which are deﬁned as
⎧
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩
ξk = [ξx,k, ξy,k, ξz,k]T
χk = [xk, yk, zk, ˙xk, ˙yk, ˙zk,
φk, θk, ψk, ˙φk, ˙θk, ˙ψk]T
ζk = [ζx,k, ζy,k, ζz,k, ζ˙x,k, ζ˙y,k, ζ˙z,k,
ζφ,k, ζθ,k, ζψ,k, ζ ˙φ,k, ζ˙θ,k, ζ ˙ψ,k]T .
(4)
The structure of the proposed TSPF is demonstrated in
Fig. 3, which is composed of the ﬁrst-stage state estimation
and the second-stage wind estimation. The UAV state is
chosen as an intermediate variable to establish a relationship
8958
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS
VOL. 59, NO. 6
DECEMBER 2023
Authorized licensed use limited to: Netaji Subhas University of Technology New Delhi. Downloaded on April 04,2026 at 08:00:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

## Page 4

Fig. 2.
Framework of the proposed active wind rejection control scheme.
Fig. 3.
Structure of the TSPF for UAV state and wind estimation.
between the winds and the measurements.
p(ξk|ζ1:k) =

p(ξk|χk)p(χk|ζ1:k)dχk
(5)
where ζ1:k = {ζ1, . . . , ζk}.
The ﬁrst-stage state estimation is designed to solve the
problem of estimating p(χk|ζ1:k)
p(χk|ζ1:k)
∝p(ζk|χk)

p(χk|χk−1)p(χk−1|ζ1:k−1)dχk−1.
(6)
Consider that a set of state particles {χ ( j)
k−1}M
j=1 and
M sets of wind particles {ξ (i, j)
k−1 }N
i=1 for j = 1, 2, . . . , M
are obtained at the time tk−1, where M stands for the
number of particles in the ﬁrst-stage ﬁlter and N stands
for the number of particles in each subﬁlter of the
second-stage ﬁlter. Sampling ˜ξ (i,j)
k
∼p(ξk|ξ (i,j)
k−1 ) and ˜χ ( j)
k
∼
1
N
N
i=1 p(χk|χ ( j)
k−1, ˜ξ (i, j)
k
), p(χk|ζ1:k) can be approximated
as
p(χk|ζ1:k) ≈
M
	
j=1
w( j)
χ,kδ(χk −˜χ ( j)
k )
(7)
where δ(·) is the Dirac delta mass and w( j)
χ,k is the normalized
weight that is calculated as
w( j)
χ,k =
p(ζk| ˜χ ( j)
k )
M
m=1 p(ζk| ˜χ (m)
k
)
.
(8)
After resampling with the weights, the equally weighted
state particles {χ ( j)
k }M
j=1 can be obtained.
The second-stage wind estimation contains M subﬁlters,
each of which is designed to solve the problem of estimating
p(ξk|χ ( j)
k )
p

ξk|χ ( j)
k

∝p

χ ( j)
k |ξk, χ ( j)
k−1

p

ξk|χ ( j)
k−1

.
(9)
Reselecting the set of wind particles {ˇξ (i,j)
k
}N
i=1 for
each subﬁlter according to χ ( j)
k ,
p(ξk|χ ( j)
k ) can be
approximated as
p(ξk|χ ( j)
k ) ≈
N
	
i=1
w(i, j)
ξ,k δ(ξk −ˇξ (i, j)
k
)
(10)
where w(i, j)
ξ,k is the normalized weight that is calculated as
w(i, j)
ξ,k =
p(χ ( j)
k |χ ( j)
k−1, ˇξ (i, j)
k
)
N
n=1 p(χ ( j)
k |χ ( j)
k−1, ˇξ (n, j)
k
)
.
(11)
After resampling with the weights, the equally weighted
state particles {ξ (i, j)
k
}N
i=1 can be obtained.
Therefore, recalling (5), p(ξk|ζ1:k) can be approximated
as
p(ξk|ζ1:k) =

p(ξk|χk)p(χk|ζ1:k)dχk
≈1
M
M
	
j=1
p(ξk|χ ( j)
k )
≈
1
MN
N
	
i=1
M
	
j=1
δ(ξk −ξ (i, j)
k
).
(12)
Subsequently, the wind estimation can be calculated as
ˆξk ≈
1
MN
N
	
i=1
M
	
j=1
ξ (i,j)
k
.
(13)
XING ET AL.: ACTIVE WIND REJECTION CONTROL FOR A QUADROTOR UAV AGAINST UNKNOWN WINDS
8959
Authorized licensed use limited to: Netaji Subhas University of Technology New Delhi. Downloaded on April 04,2026 at 08:00:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

## Page 5

Algorithm 1: Proposed TSPF for the UAV State and
Wind Estimation.
To better understand the proposed TSPF for the UAV
state and wind estimation, the pseudocode of the proposed
TSPF is given in Algorithm 1. Compared with the Kalman
ﬁlter-based methods, the proposed TSPF-based method can
avoid truncation errors due to model linearization. In addi-
tion, the TSPF-based method can better solve the sampling
problem of non-Gaussian systems, which is still a great
challenge for the Kalman ﬁlter-based methods.
REMARK 2 In this article, inspired by the early paper for
the non-Gaussian state estimation with fading measure-
ments [28], a TSPF is presented to estimate the UAV states
and unknown winds for a quadrotor UAV according to
the posterior distribution of the particles. Based on the
augmented state particle ﬁlter, this TSPF-based approach
separates the estimation of the UAV states and unknown
winds into the ﬁrst-stage ﬁlter and the second-stage ﬁlter.
In theory, the estimates of ˆχk and ˆξk almost surely converge
to E(χk|ζ1:k) and E(ξk|ζ1:k) as M →∞. Nevertheless, there
still seems to be a lack strict proof that, for unbounded func-
tions, the approximation result converges to the true optimal
estimate as the number of particles tends to inﬁnity [29],
[30].
B.
Active Wind Rejection Controller
As shown in Fig. 2, the proposed hierarchical control
system is mainly composed of the outer-loop control and
inner-loop control. The outer-loop control is designed to
generate virtual control inputs to maintain the tracking
performance of a quadrotor UAV in the presence of winds,
while the inner-loop control is designed to produce con-
trol moments to stabilize the attitude of the vehicle. The
NTSMC method is chosen as the baseline control method
in this article, because it can effectively solve the singular
problem in the TSMC [23]. It should be noted that the pro-
posed active wind rejection scheme can be also composed
with other baseline control methods.
1) Outer-Loop Control: The quadrotor UAV is a typ-
ical underactuated system because the number of outputs
is greater than the number of control inputs. To solve
this underactuating problem, the virtual control inputs are
deﬁned as
⎧
⎨
⎩
νx = −(cos φ sin θ cos ψ + sin φ sin ψ)Fz
νy = −(cos φ sin θ sin ψ −sin φ cos ψ)Fz
νz = −(cos φ cos θ)Fz
(14)
where νi for i ∈{x, y, z} denotes the virtual control input.
Therefore, based on (2), the outer-loop dynamics of a
quadrotor UAV can be rewritten as

˙χi,1 = χi,2
˙χi,2 = Gi + hi(νi + ciμi + di)
(15)
where χx,1 = x, χy,1 = y, χz,1 = z, χx,2 = ˙x, χy,2 = ˙y,
χz,2 = ˙z, Gx = Gy = 0, Gz = g, hx = hy = hz = 1
m, cx =
cy = Cdxy, cz = Cdz, μx = (ξx −˙x)

(ξx −˙x)2 + (ξy −˙y)2,
μy = (ξy −˙y)

(ξx −˙x)2 + (ξy −˙y)2, and μz = ξz −˙z.
Let χd
i for i ∈{x, y, z} denote the desired trajectory.
Then, the trajectory tracking error can be deﬁned as
˜χi = χi,1 −χd
i
(16)
and the derivative of the trajectory tracking error is given
by
˙˜χi = ˙χi,1 −˙χd
i = χi,2 −˙χd
i .
(17)
By combining (15) and (17), the error dynamics can be
obtained as
¨˜χi = ˙χi,2 −¨χd
i
= Gi + hi(νi + ciμi + di) −¨χd
i .
(18)
Introduce the following nonsingular terminal sliding-
mode surface [23]:
si = ˜χi + 1
βi
˙˜χ
pi
qi
i
(19)
where βi, pi, and qi are positive parameters. Speciﬁcally, pi
and qi are positive odd numbers, which satisﬁes 1 < pi
qi < 2.
To allow the sliding variable to reach the designated
sliding surface and then remain in close proximity to the
sliding surface, the position control law can be designed in
the following form:
νi = νeq
i
+ νdis
i
(20)
where νeq
i
is the equivalent control part to stabilize the
ideal system without considering the disturbances, and νdis
i
is the discontinuous control part to compensating for the
disturbances.
8960
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS
VOL. 59, NO. 6
DECEMBER 2023
Authorized licensed use limited to: Netaji Subhas University of Technology New Delhi. Downloaded on April 04,2026 at 08:00:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

## Page 6

Without considering the wind drags, the equivalent con-
trol law is designed as
νeq
i
= −1
hi

βi
qi
pi
˙˜χ
2−pi
qi
i
+ Gi −¨χd
i

.
(21)
Then, to cope with the disturbances, the discontinuous
control law is designed as
νdis
i
= −ηisign(si)
(22)
where ηi > Di is positive parameters.
In this way, the NTSMC-based outer-loop control law
without wind drag compensation is designed as
νo
i = −1
hi

βi
qi
pi
˙˜χ
2−pi
qi
i
+ Gi −¨χd
i

−ηisign(si).
(23)
With the consideration of model uncertainties, the con-
trol law to compensate for the wind drags is designed as
νc
i = −ˆciμi
(24)
where ˆci for i ∈{x, y, z} denote the estimation of drag
coefﬁcients. The corresponding adaptive law to estimate
the drag coefﬁcients is given by
˙ˆci = γisi
1
βi
pi
qi
˙˜χ
pi
qi −1
i
hiμi
(25)
Therefore, the ultimate outer-loop control law to generate
the virtual control signals is given by
νi = νo
i + νc
i
= −1
hi

βi
qi
pi
˙˜χ
2−pi
qi
i
+ Gi −¨χd
i

−ηisign(si) −ˆciμi
(26)
where i ∈{x, y, z}.
Considering the wind estimation errors produced by the
TSPF, the error associated with the drag forces is denoted
as ˜μ−1
i
= μ−1
i
−ˆμ−1
i . Then, the model (15) can be recon-
structed as
˙χi,2 = Gi + hi(νi + ciμi + di)
= Gi + hi[νi + (1 −μi ˜μ−1
i
)ci ˆμi + di]
= Gi + hi(νi + c∗
i ˆμi + di)
(27)
where c∗
i for i ∈{x, y, z} are deﬁned as the new drag
coefﬁcients of the reconstructed model. By employing the
adaptive law to estimate the newly deﬁned drag coefﬁcients,
one can compensate for the wind estimation errors to main-
tain the tracking performance.
REMARK 3 The disturbance observer is usually adopted to
estimatethelumpeddisturbancesonthequadrotorUAV,and
the corresponding control law is developed to attenuate the
aerodynamic drag forces. However, this article develops the
active wind rejection control law for a quadrotor UAV based
on the wind estimates obtained by the proposed TSPF. Com-
pared with the disturbance observer-based control scheme,
the proposed control scheme can have an accurate and
quick transient response to the rapidly changing winds and
attenuate the inﬂuence of the system noises on the quadrotor
system.
Based on the virtual control signals, the control force
and desired roll and pitch angles can be computed by
⎧
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩
Fz =

ν2x + ν2y + ν2z
χd
φ = arcsin

−
νx sin χd
ψ−νy cos χd
ψ
√
ν2x +ν2y +ν2z

χd
θ = arctan

 νx cos χd
ψ+νy sin χd
ψ
νz

.
(28)
2) Inner-Loop Control: Based on (2), the inner-loop
dynamics of a quadrotor UAV can be rewritten as

˙χj,1 = χj,2
˙χj,2 = f j + hj(τj + dj)
(29)
where χφ,1 = φ, χθ,1 = θ, χψ,1 = ψ, χφ,2 = ˙φ, χθ,2 =
˙θ, χψ,2 = ˙ψ, fφ = Iy−Iz
Ix
˙θ ˙ψ, fθ = Iz−Ix
Iy
˙φ ˙ψ, fψ = Ix−Iy
Iz
˙φ ˙θ,
hφ = 1
Ix , hθ = 1
Iy , and hψ = 1
Iz .
Withthedesiredattitudesχd
j for j ∈{φ, θ, ψ}obtained
from (28), the attitude tracking error is deﬁned as
˜χj = χj,1 −χd
j,1
(30)
and the derivative of the attitude tracking error is given by
˙˜χj = ˙χj,1 −˙χd
j,1 = χj,2 −˙χd
j .
(31)
By combining (29) and (31), the error dynamics can be
obtained as
¨˜χj = ˙χj,2 −¨χd
j
= f j + hj(τj + dj) −¨χd
j .
(32)
Again, select the nonsingular terminal sliding-mode
surface [23]
sj = ˜χj + 1
βj
˙˜χ
p j
q j
j
(33)
where βj, pj, and qj are positive design parameters. pj and
qj are odd numbers, which satisﬁes 1 < pj
qj < 2.
Therefore, the attitude control law is designed as
τj = τ eq
j + τ dis
j
= −1
hj

βj
qj
pj
˙˜χ
2−
p j
q j
j
+ f j −¨χd
j

−ηjsign(sj) (34)
where ηj > Dj are positive design parameters.
C.
Stability Analysis
LEMMA 1 Consider the system state trajectories converge
toward the sliding surface. The η-reachability condition is
a strong condition that ensures an ideal sliding motion in
ﬁnite time, even in the presence of external disturbances or
uncertainties [31]. The expression of the η-reachability is
given by
s˙s ≤−η|s|
(35)
where η represents a positive design scalar.
XING ET AL.: ACTIVE WIND REJECTION CONTROL FOR A QUADROTOR UAV AGAINST UNKNOWN WINDS
8961
Authorized licensed use limited to: Netaji Subhas University of Technology New Delhi. Downloaded on April 04,2026 at 08:00:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

## Page 7

THEOREM 1 Consider the outer-loop dynamic model of a
quadrotor UAV (15) in the presence of wind drags and
bounded disturbances. Then, the desired trajectory track-
ing performance can be guaranteed if the wind estimation
scheme is designed as (6)–(13), the adaptive law to the drag
coefﬁcient is designed as (25), and the outer-control law is
designed as (26).
PROOF Consider the following Lyapunov candidate func-
tion:
VP = 1
2
z
	
i=x
s2
i + 1
γi
˜c2
i
(36)
where ˜ci = ˆci −ci is the estimation error of drag coefﬁcient
for i ∈{x, y, z}.
By differentiating (19) with respect to time, the expres-
sion can be obtained as
˙si = ˙˜χi + 1
βi
pi
qi
˙˜χ
pi
qi −1
i
¨˜χi
= ˙˜χi + 1
βi
pi
qi
˙˜χ
pi
qi −1
i
[Gi + hi(νi + ciμi + di) −¨χd
i ].
(37)
Thus, the time derivative of the Lyapunov candidate
function is obtained as
˙VP =
z
	
i=x
si˙si + 1
γi
˜ci˙ˆci
=
z
	
i=x
si

˙˜χi + 1
βi
pi
qi
˙˜χ
pi
qi −1
i

Gi + hi(νi + ciμi
+ di) −¨χd
i

+ 1
γi
˜ci˙ˆci.
(38)
Substituting the adaptive law (25) and the control law
(26) into (38), the derivative of the selected Lyapunov
candidate function can be calculated as
˙VP =
z
	
i=x
si

˙˜χi + 1
βi
pi
qi
˙˜χ
pi
qi −1
i

Gi
+ hi

−1
hi

βi
qi
pi
˙˜χ
2−pi
qi
i
+ Gi −¨χd
i

−ηisign(si)
−ˆciμi + ciμi + di

−¨χd
i

+ 1
γi
˜ci˙ˆci
=
z
	
i=x
si
1
βi
pi
qi
˙˜χ
pi
qi −1
i
[−hiˆciμi + hiciμi + hidi
−hiηisign(si)] + 1
γi
˜ci˙ˆci
=
z
	
i=x
˜ci
 1
γi
˙ˆci −si
1
βi
pi
qi
˙˜χ
pi
qi −1
i
hiμi

+ 1
βi
pi
qi
˙˜χ
pi
qi −1
i
hi(−ηisisign(si) + disi)
≤
z
	
i=x
−η′
i|si|
(39)
TABLE I
Parameters of the Quadrotor Dynamic Model
where η′
i = 1
βi
pi
qi ˙˜χ
pi
qi −1
i
hi(ηi −Di) ≥0.
Therefore,
the
system
satisﬁes
the
standard
η-
reachability condition to guarantee the trajectory tracking
performance of the designed outer-loop controller in the
presence of wind drags and bounded disturbances.
■
REMARK 4 It is important to notice that due to the applica-
tion of the discontinuous controller νdis
i , the usual regularity
conditions for the unicity of closed-loop solutions do not
hold, which is an in-depth topic. Nevertheless, in this article,
it is sufﬁcient to note that the only discontinuity in the
closed-loop system is caused by sign(·), which means that
the limited solutions exist and they exist for all time, imply-
ing that the closed-loop system is forward complete [32],
[33]. To deal with the chattering and discontinuous prob-
lems caused by the sign(·) function, the hyperbolic tangent
function tanh(·) can be used as an alternative. The hyper-
bolic tangent function is deﬁned as
tanh

 s
ϵ

= e
s
ϵ −e−s
ϵ
e
s
ϵ + e−s
ϵ
(40)
where ϵ > 0 is the parameter.
IV.
SIMULATION RESULTS
Inthissection,simulationsareconductedtodemonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed active wind rejection con-
trol scheme for a quadrotor UAV against unknown winds.
The parameters of the dynamic model of the quadrotor UAV
are given in Table I.
The initial states of the quadrotor UAV are set as x(0) =
0 m, y(0) = 0 m, z(0) = 0 m, φ(0) = 0 rad, θ(0) = 0 rad,
and ψ(0) = 0 rad. The controller design parameters are set
as βx = βy = βz = 1, px = py = pz = 13, qx = qy = qz =
11, ηx = ηy = ηz = 0.5, βφ = βθ = βψ = 5, pφ = pθ =
pψ = 13, qφ = qθ = qψ = 11, and ηφ = ηθ = ηψ = 1. The
parameters of the adaptive law (25) are set as (γx, γy, γz) =
(1, 1, 1). The particle numbers of the ﬁrst-stage and
second-stage particle ﬁlters are set as M = 200 and N =
200, respectively.
To get closer to the actual situation, the system noises are
considered. The process noise is assumed to be independent
zero-mean Gaussian noise, the variance of which is set as
Qk =

10−6I6×6
10−12I6×6

(41)
8962
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS
VOL. 59, NO. 6
DECEMBER 2023
Authorized licensed use limited to: Netaji Subhas University of Technology New Delhi. Downloaded on April 04,2026 at 08:00:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

## Page 8

whereQk denotesthecovariancematrixoftheprocessnoise.
The measurement noise is modeled by a mixture of two
Gaussian distributions
p(ζk|χk) = αN (μ1, 1) + (1 −α)N (μ2, 2)
(42)
where α is the glint presence probability. In the simulation,
the mean vectors of the two Gaussian distributions are
set as μ1 = 012×1 and μ2 = 10−1I12×1, and the covariance
matrices of the two Gaussian distributions are set as
⎧
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩
1 =

10−2I6×6
10−4I6×6

2 =

10−3I6×6
10−5I6×6

.
(43)
It should be noticed that the Kalman ﬁlter-based approaches
may not work perfectly or even diverge due to the non-
Gaussian measurement noises.
The random walk model is adopted to propagate the
wind particles as
ξk = ξk−1 + wξ,k
(44)
where wξ,k denotes the zero-mean Gaussian process
noise vector, the variances of which are set as Qξ,k =
diag([0.01, 0.01, 0.01]).
To demonstrate the advantages of the active wind rejec-
tion control scheme for a quadrotor UAV against unknown
winds, a nonlinear disturbance observer (NDO)-based con-
trol scheme is adopted to compare with the proposed control
scheme. The NDO can estimate the unknown slow time-
varying lumped external disturbance and generate control
input compensation for a quadrotor UAV by considering the
difference between the measurements and the states of the
nominal plant model [11]. In principle, the designs of NDO-
based control scheme and the proposed control scheme both
depend on the dynamic model of a quadrotor UAV. They
have the comparable performances against unknown slow
time-varying winds when there is no measurement noise.
However, the inﬂuences of measurement noises on the
performance of the control schemes should be considered
in practical engineering applications. According to (15), the
NDO is expressed as
ˆdi = ϖi + Li · χi,2
˙ϖi = −Li · ˆdi −Li ·

Gi + 1
mνi

(45)
where ϖi for i ∈{x, y, z} denotes the internal state of the
nonlinear observer and Li is the NDO gain.
A.
Hovering Performance With No Wind
In the ﬁrst scenario, the quadrotor UAV is controlled to
reach and hover at the position [1, 1, 1]T m from the initial
position in the absence of external wind disturbances. The
performance of the vehicle is affected by the system noises.
Fig. 4 shows the state estimation results of the proposed
TSPFmethod. ItcanbeseenthattheproposedTSPF method
can provide the accurate estimation of the UAV states,
although the measurement noise is non-Gaussian.
Fig. 4.
State estimation performance in Scenario 1.
Fig. 5.
Comparison of the hovering performance in Scenario 1.
Fig. 5 demonstrates the comparison of the hovering
performance in Scenario 1. It can be observed that the
NDO-based control method has the poor performance in
the presence of nonzero-mean measurement noises. It is
because the disturbance observation is considerably in-
ﬂuenced by measurement noises. As a result, the control
input compensation generated by NDO includes the com-
ponent of measurement noises. It can also be seen that
there is a considerable improvement in the performance
of the NDO-based control scheme without considering the
measurement noises. The simulation results also illustrate
that the proposed TSPF-based control scheme can reduce
the noise effects and maintain the hovering performance of
the quadrotor UAV in the presence of system noises. It is
XING ET AL.: ACTIVE WIND REJECTION CONTROL FOR A QUADROTOR UAV AGAINST UNKNOWN WINDS
8963
Authorized licensed use limited to: Netaji Subhas University of Technology New Delhi. Downloaded on April 04,2026 at 08:00:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

## Page 9

Fig. 6.
Comparison of the control signals in Scenario 1.
because TSPF can search for a set of particles to approxi-
mate the distribution of UAV states from the posterior dis-
tribution in a stochastic problem formulation, while NDO
and other DO-based approaches are basically deterministic
approaches. That is also the reason and new contributions
toward such an application for us to develop the TSPF-based
approach in this article.
Fig. 6 shows the comparison of the control signals in
Scenario 1. It can be seen that due to the existence of system
noises, the signals of the control force and moments, which
are generated by the NTSMC-based controller, oscillate sig-
niﬁcantly. Compared with the NDO-based control method,
the proposed TSPF-based control scheme can effectively at-
tenuate the oscillations by reducing the system noise effects.
Nevertheless, in the practical engineering applications, the
control signals are usually smoothed by the low-pass ﬁlter
before they are sent to the actuators.
B.
Hovering Performance Against Gust Winds
In the second scenario, the quadrotor UAV is controlled
to hover against gust winds. The gust winds are rendered
according to the discrete 1-cosine wind gust model [34],
which are expressed as
ξx =
⎧
⎨
⎩
0,
t ≤10
4
2(1 −cos 2π(t−10)
5
),
10 < t ≤15
0,
t > 15
(46)
ξy =
⎧
⎨
⎩
0,
t ≤10
3
2(1 −cos 2π(t−10)
5
),
10 < t ≤15
0,
t > 15
(47)
ξz =
⎧
⎨
⎩
0,
t ≤10
2
2(1 −cos 2π(t−10)
5
),
10 < t ≤15
0,
t > 15.
(48)
Figs. 7 and 8 show the state and wind estimation results in
Scenario 2. It can be seen that the proposed TSPF-based
method can effectively reduce the system noises and accu-
rately capture the rapid changes of wind gusts.
Fig. 9 shows the comparison of the hovering perfor-
mance in Scenario 2. When the wind gusts occur at the time
Fig. 7.
State estimation performance in Scenario 2.
Fig. 8.
Wind estimation performance in Scenario 2.
instant t = 10 s, there are signiﬁcant position drifts of the
quadrotor UAV by using the NDO-based control method.
This is because the disturbance observer (45) cannot take a
quick response to the rapidly changing wind disturbances.
In contrast, the proposed TSPF-based control scheme can
actively attenuate the effects of wind gusts based on the
wind estimation provided by the TSPF. From Fig. 10, it can
be seen that the control signals are given by the proposed
control scheme with signiﬁcant oscillations to attenuate
the wind effects when the wind gusts occur, although the
oscillations are unattainable for the actuators.
8964
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS
VOL. 59, NO. 6
DECEMBER 2023
Authorized licensed use limited to: Netaji Subhas University of Technology New Delhi. Downloaded on April 04,2026 at 08:00:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

## Page 10

Fig. 9.
Comparison of the hovering performance in Scenario 2.
Fig. 10.
Comparison of the control signals in Scenario 2.
C.
Hovering Performance Against Dryden Turbulence
In the third scenario, the quadrotor UAV is controlled
to hover against the Dryden turbulence [34], [35]. Figs. 11
and 12 show the estimation results of the UAV states and the
Dryden turbulence produced by the proposed TSPF. It can
be seen that the hovering performance of the quadrotor UAV
is continuously affected by the wind turbulence. The pro-
posed TSPF method can accurately capture the continuous
changes of the wind turbulence.
Fig. 13 illustrates the comparison of the hovering perfor-
mance in Scenario 3. It can be seen that the proposed TSPF-
based control scheme can outperform the NDO-based
control methods in the presence of the Dryden turbulence.
This is because the proposed scheme can provide the esti-
mation with higher transient accuracy for the continuously
changing winds. In addition, the proposed scheme can
reduce the inﬂuence of the system noises to maintain the
Fig. 11.
State estimation performance in Scenario 3.
Fig. 12.
Wind estimation performance in Scenario 3.
hovering performance of the vehicle. From Fig. 14, it can be
observed that the wind turbulence results in the continuous
oscillations in the generation of the control signals.
D.
Sinusoidal Trajectory Tracking Performance Against
Continuous Winds
In the fourth scenario, the quadrotor UAV is controlled
to track a sinusoidal trajectory in the presence of continuous
winds. The desired trajectory is given by
⎧
⎨
⎩
xd = 5 cos( π
15t) −5
yd = 5 sin( π
15t)
zd = −sin( 2π
15 t).
(49)
Fig. 15 shows the comparison of the trajectory tracking
performance in Scenario 4, and the trajectory tracking errors
are given in Table II. The mean absolute errors and the
XING ET AL.: ACTIVE WIND REJECTION CONTROL FOR A QUADROTOR UAV AGAINST UNKNOWN WINDS
8965
Authorized licensed use limited to: Netaji Subhas University of Technology New Delhi. Downloaded on April 04,2026 at 08:00:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

## Page 11

TABLE II
Comparison of Trajectory Tracking Errors Against Continuous Winds
Fig. 13.
Comparison of the hovering performance in Scenario 3.
Fig. 14.
Comparison of the control signals in Scenario 3.
root mean squared errors of the TSPF-based scheme are
smaller than those of the NDO-based control methods. This
indicates that the trajectory tracking performance of the
proposed TSPF-based control scheme is also better than
the NDO-based control methods.
Fig. 15.
Comparison of the trajectory tracking performance in
Scenario 4.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this article, an active wind rejection control scheme is
proposed for a quadrotor UAV against unknown winds. The
designed TSPF can quickly capture the wind variations and
produce accurate wind estimation from quadrotor motion
without additional wind sensors. Based on the explicit wind
estimation and the baseline NTSMC, the proposed control
scheme can actively generate appropriate control signals
to attenuate the wind disturbances. Moreover, considering
the wind estimation errors, the adaptive drag coefﬁcients
can be adopted to maintain the tracking performance of
the quadrotor UAV. Simulation results have demonstrated
the effectiveness of the proposed control scheme against
unknown winds. Nevertheless, issues of actuator and sen-
sor faults and model uncertainties [36] have not yet been
addressed in the current work. One of the future works
will be to investigate these factors, which may have a
signiﬁcant impact on the performance of the active wind
rejection control scheme. In addition, the effectiveness of
the proposed control scheme for a quadrotor UAV against
unknown winds should be validated by real ﬂight tests in
the future.
8966
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS
VOL. 59, NO. 6
DECEMBER 2023
Authorized licensed use limited to: Netaji Subhas University of Technology New Delhi. Downloaded on April 04,2026 at 08:00:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

## Page 12

REFERENCES
[1] N. Cho, S. Lee, J. Kim, Y. Kim, S. Park, and C. Song, “Wind
compensation framework for unpowered aircraft using online way-
point correction,” IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst., vol. 56, no. 1,
pp. 698–710, Feb. 2020.
[2] V. P. Tran, F. Santoso, and M. A. Garratt, “Adaptive trajectory
tracking for quadrotor systems in unknown wind environments us-
ing particle swarm optimization-based strictly negative imaginary
controllers,” IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst., vol. 57, no. 3,
pp. 1742–1752, Jun. 2021.
[3] L. Guo and S. Cao, “Anti-disturbance control theory for systems
with multiple disturbances: A survey,” ISA Trans., vol. 53, no. 4,
pp. 846–849, 2014.
[4] G. Perozzi, D. Eﬁmov, J.-M. Biannic, and L. Planckaert, “Trajectory
tracking for a quadrotor under wind perturbations: Sliding mode
control with state-dependent gains,” J. Franklin Inst., vol. 355, no. 12,
pp. 4809–4838, 2018.
[5] K. Alexis, G. Nikolakopoulos, and A. Tzes, “Switching model
predictive attitude control for a quadrotor helicopter subject to
atmospheric disturbances,” Control Eng. Pract., vol. 19, no. 10,
pp. 1195–1207, 2011.
[6] Z. Zuo and S. Mallikarjunan, “L1 adaptive backstepping for robust
trajectory tracking of UAVs,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 64,
no. 4, pp. 2944–2954, Apr. 2017.
[7] O. A. Jasim and S. M. Veres, “A robust controller for multi rotor
UAVs,” Aerosp. Sci. Technol., vol. 105, 2020, Art. no. 106010.
[8] J.Xu,P.Shi,C.-C.Lim,C.Cai,andY.Zou,“Reliabletrackingcontrol
for under-actuated quadrotors with wind disturbances,” IEEE Trans.
Syst. Man Cybern. Syst., vol. 49, no. 10, pp. 2059–2070, Oct. 2019.
[9] B. Dai, Y. He, G. Zhang, F. Gu, L. Yang, and W. Xu, “Wind
disturbance rejection for unmanned aerial vehicles using acceleration
feedback enhanced H∞method,” Auton. Robot., vol. 44, no. 7,
pp. 1271–1285, 2020.
[10] Z. Dong, J. Jiang, C. Liu, M. Coombes, and W.-H. Chen, “Economic
model-predictive control for aircraft forced landing: Framework and
two-level implementation,” IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst.,
vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 1119–1132, Apr. 2022.
[11] W.-H. Chen, J. Yang, L. Guo, and S. Li, “Disturbance-observer-based
control and related methods—An overview,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Elec-
tron., vol. 63, no. 2, pp. 1083–1095, Feb. 2016.
[12] A. E. Rodríguez-Mata, I. González-Hernández, J. G. Rangel-Peraza,
S. Salazar, and R. L. Leal, “Wind-gust compensation algorithm based
on high-gain residual observer to control a quadrotor aircraft: Real-
time veriﬁcation task at ﬁxed point,” Int. J. Control Autom. Syst.,
vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 856–866, 2018.
[13] K. Guo, J. Jia, X. Yu, L. Guo, and L. Xie, “Multiple observers
based anti-disturbance control for a quadrotor UAV against pay-
load and wind disturbances,” Control Eng. Pract., vol. 102, 2020,
Art. no. 104560.
[14] M. A. Lotufo, L. Colangelo, C. Perez-Montenegro, E. Canuto, and
C. Novara, “UAV quadrotor attitude control: An ADRC-EMC com-
bined approach,” Control Eng. Pract., vol. 84, pp. 13–22, 2019.
[15] S.
Wang,
J.
Chen,
and
X.
He,
“An
adaptive
composite
disturbance rejection for attitude control of the agricultural
quadrotor UAV,” ISA Trans., vol. 129, pp. 564–579, 2022,
doi: 10.1016/j.isatra.2022.01.012.
[16] M. O’Connell et al., “Neural-ﬂy enables rapid learning for agile ﬂight
in strong winds,” Sci. Robot., vol. 7, no. 66, 2022, Art. no. eabm6597.
[17] B. Arain and F. Kendoul, “Real-time wind speed estimation and
compensation for improved ﬂight,” IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron.
Syst., vol. 50, no. 2, pp. 1599–1606, Apr. 2014.
[18] P. Qi, X. Zhao, and R. Palacios, “Autonomous landing control of
highly ﬂexible aircraft based on LiDAR preview in the presence of
wind turbulence,” IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst., vol. 55, no. 5,
pp. 2543–2555, Oct. 2019.
[19] P. Tang, F. Zhang, J. Ye, and D. Lin, “An integral TSMC-based adap-
tive fault-tolerant control for quadrotor with external disturbances
and parametric uncertainties,” Aerosp. Sci. Technol., vol. 109, 2021,
Art. no. 106415.
[20] L. Cui, R. Zhang, H. Yang, and Z. Zuo, “Adaptive super-twisting
trajectory tracking control for an unmanned aerial vehicle under gust
winds,” Aerosp. Sci. Technol., vol. 115, 2021, Art. no. 106833.
[21] O. Moﬁd and S. Mobayen, “Adaptive ﬁnite-time backstepping global
sliding mode tracker of quad-rotor UAVs under model uncertainty,
wind perturbation, and input saturation,” IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Elec-
tron. Syst., vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 140–151, Feb. 2022.
[22] M. Zare, F. Pazooki, and S. E. Haghighi, “Quadrotor UAV position
and altitude tracking using an optimized fuzzy-sliding mode control,”
IETE J. Res., vol. 68, pp. 1–15, 2020.
[23] Y. Feng, X. Yu, and F. Han, “On nonsingular terminal sliding-
mode control of nonlinear systems,” Automatica, vol. 49, no. 6,
pp. 1715–1722, 2013.
[24] F. Wang, H. Gao, K. Wang, C. Zhou, Q. Zong, and C. Hua, “Dis-
turbance observer-based ﬁnite-time control design for a quadrotor
UAV with external disturbance,” IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst.,
vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 834–847, Apr. 2021.
[25] Z. Hou, P. Lu, and Z. Tu, “Nonsingular terminal sliding mode control
for a quadrotor UAV with a total rotor failure,” Aerosp. Sci. Technol.,
vol. 98, 2020, Art. no. 105716.
[26] H. Hassani, A. Mansouri, and A. Ahaitouf, “Robust autonomous
ﬂight for quadrotor UAV based on adaptive nonsingular fast terminal
sliding mode control,” Int. J. Dyn. Control, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 619–635,
2021.
[27] J. González-Rocha, C. A. Woolsey, C. Sultan, and S. F. J. De,
“Wekker Sensing wind from quadrotor motion,” J. Guid. Control
Dyn., vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 836–852, 2019.
[28] W. Li, Z. Wang, Y. Yuan, and L. Guo, “Two-stage particle ﬁlter-
ing for non-Gaussian state estimation with fading measurements,”
Automatica, vol. 115, 2020, Art. no. 108882.
[29] X.-L. Hu, T. B. Schon, and L. Ljung, “A basic convergence result
for particle ﬁltering,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 56, no. 4,
pp. 1337–1348, Apr. 2008.
[30] X.-L. Hu, T. B. Schon, and L. Ljung, “A general convergence result
for particle ﬁltering,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 59, no. 7,
pp. 3424–3429, Jul. 2011.
[31] M. T. Hamayun, C. Edwards, and H. Alwi, Fault Tolerant Control
Schemes Using Integral Sliding Modes. Berlin, Germany: Springer,
2016.
[32] A. Loría, E. Panteley, and H. Nijmeijer, “A Remark on passivity-
based and discontinuous control of uncertain nonlinear systems,”
Automatica, vol. 37, no. 9, pp. 1481–1487, 2001.
[33] F. H. Clarke, Y. S. Ledyaev, R. J. Stern, and P. R. Wolenski, Non-
smooth Analysis and Control Theory. Berlin, Germany: Springer,
2008.
[34] M. Lungu, “Auto-landing of ﬁxed wing unmanned aerial vehicles
using the backstepping control,” ISA Trans., vol. 95, pp. 194–210,
2019.
[35] K. Eliker, S. Grouni, M. Tadjine, and W. Zhang, “Practical ﬁnite time
adaptive robust ﬂight control system for quad-copter UAVs,” Aerosp.
Sci. Technol., vol. 98, 2020, Art. no. 105708.
[36] B. Wang, Y. Shen, and Y. Zhang, “Active fault-tolerant control for a
quadrotor helicopter against actuator faults and model uncertainties,”
Aerosp. Sci. Technol., vol. 99, 2020, Art. no. 105745.
Zhewen Xing received the M.S. degree in guid-
ance, navigation, and control from Northwestern
Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China, in 2018,
and the Ph.D. degree in mechanical engineer-
ing from Concordia University, Montreal, QC,
Canada, in 2023.
His research interests include state estima-
tion, wind estimation, and control for unmanned
aerial vehicles.
XING ET AL.: ACTIVE WIND REJECTION CONTROL FOR A QUADROTOR UAV AGAINST UNKNOWN WINDS
8967
Authorized licensed use limited to: Netaji Subhas University of Technology New Delhi. Downloaded on April 04,2026 at 08:00:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

## Page 13

Youmin Zhang (Fellow, IEEE) received the
B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in automatic con-
trol from Northwestern Polytechnical Univer-
sity, Xi’an, China, in 1983, 1986, and 1995,
respectively.
He is currently a Professor with the Depart-
ment of Mechanical, Industrial and Aerospace
Engineering, Concordia University, Montreal,
QC, Canada. He has authored eight books, more
than 600 journal and conference papers, and
book chapters. His current research interests
include fault diagnosis and fault-tolerant control, cooperative guidance,
navigation and control of unmanned aerial/space/ground/marine vehicles,
with applications to forest ﬁre monitoring and ﬁghting by integrating with
remote sensing techniques, renewable energy and smart grids, and smart
cities.
Dr. Zhang is a registered Professional Engineer (P.Eng.), an Associate
Editor, Editorial (Advisory) Board Member, Co-Editor-in-Chief, or Editor-
at-Large of several international journals (including IEEE TRANSACTIONS
ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS
ON INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS, and IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS
AND SYSTEMS - II: EXPRESS BRIEFS). He was the (Honorary) General
Chair, the Program Chair, and the IPC Member of several unmanned sys-
tems and energy relevant international conferences. He was the President
of International Society of Intelligent Unmanned Systems (2019–2022)
and a Member of the Technical Committee for several scientiﬁc societies.
He is a Fellow of CSME and a Senior Member of AIAA.
Chun-Yi Su (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the Ph.D. degree in control engineering from
the South China University of Technology,
Guangzhou, China, in 1990.
After a seven-year stint with the University
of Victoria, Victoria, BC, Canada, in 1998,
he joined Concordia University, Montreal, QC,
Canada, where he is currently a Professor of me-
chanical and industrial engineering and holds the
ConcordiaUniversityResearchChairinControl.
He has also held several short-time visiting po-
sitions including Chang Jiang Chair Professorship by China’s Ministry of
Education and JSPS Invitation Fellowship from Japan. He is the author
or coauthor of more than 300 publications, which have appeared in
journals, as book chapters, and in conference proceedings. His research
cinterests include control theory and its applications to various mechanical
systems, with a recent focus on control of systems involving hysteresis
nonlinearities.
Dr. was an Associate Editor for IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATIC
CONTROL and IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONTROL SYSTEMS TECHNOL-
OGY. He has been on the Editorial Board of 18 journals, including IFAC’s
Mechatronics. He has also served for many conferences as an Organizing
Committee Member.
8968
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS
VOL. 59, NO. 6
DECEMBER 2023
Authorized licensed use limited to: Netaji Subhas University of Technology New Delhi. Downloaded on April 04,2026 at 08:00:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
