# 1-s2.0-S0016003226001110-main.pdf

## Page 1

Design of sliding mode reaching law controller with variable gain 
extended state observer for robust tracking of QUAVs
Yuxuan Yi a, Omid Mofid b, Saleh Mobayen c,*
a School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Faculty of Engineering,The University of Sydney, Australia
b Computer Science Department, University of Tulsa, OK, USA
c Graduate Institute of Data Science, National Yunlin University of Science and Technology, Douliou, Taiwan
A R T I C L E  I N F O
keywords:
QUAV system
Variable gain extended state observer
Sliding mode reaching law
Dynamic disturbance
State uncertainty
A B S T R A C T
This paper investigates the trajectory tracking of a quad-rotor system that is affected by dynamic 
disturbances and uncertain system states. For this reason, a control method combining a sliding 
mode reaching law with a variable gain extended state observer is designed to guarantee accurate 
tracking performance. In the first step, for the estimation of the external disturbance and quad- 
rotor's uncertain states, the VGESO is proposed. In the second step, a sliding mode reaching law is 
extended considering the approximated states of the quad-rotor system. Afterward, the tracking 
error and sliding mode reaching law surface are defined and introduced. Then, for demonstration 
of the stability of the sliding surface, which results in desired tracking of the quad-rotor system, 
Lyapunov stability theory is used. Finally, the recommended control technique is evaluated using 
both pure simulations operated in MATLAB/Simulink and hardware-in-loop implementation by 
the Speedgoat system, which confirms the practical feasibility of the proposed method in fast 
tracking response, accurate trajectory tracking, and robustness against external perturbation. 
Moreover, to highlight the efficiency of the proposed method, quantitative comparison results are 
provided to show that the proposed method offers 60% faster tracking response and 70% better 
transient response of tracking error compared to the existing techniques.
1. INTRODUCTION
In recent years, extraordinary characteristics of the quad-rotor Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (QUAV) system, including low-cost 
maintenance, simple body, fast maneuvering, and accurate horizontal and vertical takeoff and landing, enhanced the performance 
of the QUAV system to be used in several fields, including surveying operations of agricultural and residential land, relief and fire­
fighting operations, and military missions [1–4]. These amazing features make QUAV special among different kinds of UAVs, such as 
helicopters and fixed-wing aircraft [5,6]. For the QUAV system, the tracking control is the most vital problem, and obtaining the 
precise attitude and position controller is challenging due to dynamic disturbance and state uncertainty [7–9]. To overcome these 
challenges, some control methods have been proposed, such as Proportional-Integral-Derivative (PID) control, Linear Quadratic 
Regulator (LQR) control, learning-based control, and Fuzzy Logic (FL) control [10–13]. Compared to the above-mentioned control 
methods, Sliding Mode Control (SMC) offers great advantages in that there is no dependency on the precise system models [14–20]. 
Because of its suitable design and computational facets, the SMC method combined with the reaching law technique has been widely 
* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: yuxuanyixy@outlook.com (Y. Yi), omm7090@utulsa.edu (O. Mofid), mobayens@yuntech.edu.tw (S. Mobayen). 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Journal of the Franklin Institute
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/fi
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfranklin.2026.108511
Received 27 March 2025; Received in revised form 28 September 2025; Accepted 7 February 2026  
Journal of the Franklin Institute 363 (2026) 108511 
Available online 8 February 2026 
0016-0032/© 2026 The Franklin Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, 
and similar technologies.

## Page 2

studied recently [21–27]. Hence, the Sliding Mode Reaching Law Control (SMRLC) method presents two advantages, including forcing 
state trajectories to reach a proposed sliding surface in the finite time and decreasing the chattering phenomenon by employing 
reaching law based on exponential function. It is clear that considering the impact of model uncertainty and external disturbances is 
crucial, as real-world quad-rotor systems face numerous sources of uncertainty, including measurement noise, parameter variations, 
unmodeled dynamics, and external disturbances like wind. To determine the feasibility of an upper bound, it is necessary to evaluate 
the impact of uncertainties and disturbances by considering worst-case scenarios. Moreover, performing a robustness analysis is crucial 
to assess whether the quad-rotor system maintains stability and performs adequately when disturbances approach the upper bound. If 
the system shows poor performance or instability under these conditions, it indicates that the upper bound may not be feasible. 
Consequently, recent studies have attempted to introduce control methods based on disturbance observers, including extended 
disturbance observers, sliding mode disturbance observers, and high-order sliding mode disturbance observers, to counteract and 
mitigate the effects of these challenging external disturbances [28–31]. The Variable Gain Extended State Observer (VGESO) has some 
significant advantages compared to the traditional observer for a nonlinear system with coupled nonlinearities, time-varying states, 
and exterior perturbations. Although the traditional observers are impressive in the approximation of nonlinear states, uncertainties, 
and disturbances, they are exceedingly dependent on observer gains, which can affect the speed rate between convergence and noise 
sensitivity. In contrast, the VGESO can regularly set observer gain according to the approximation error, which provides a faster 
convergence rate. Superior robustness against model uncertainty and external perturbations is another outstanding feature of the 
VGESO, which is a chief for practical applications in which achieving the exact model of the system is not possible. Two other 
important benefits of the VGESO include noise rejection and robustness against sudden or abrupt changes of disturbances [32,33]. In 
[34], a variable gain robust state observer is proposed to ensure the robustness of the uncertain linear system, with the gain regulated 
by a nonlinear modification function. In [35], an impulsive variable gain observer, which updates the gain based on the interval 
between measurements, is presented to overcome noise measurement in a nonlinear system.
In [36], the carrier landing control of the fixed-wing QUAV system under dynamic uncertainties and dynamic disturbances, a 
discrete-time fuzzy-based disturbance observer using the prescribed performance control (PPC) technique is recommended. In this 
work, the dynamic uncertainties and dynamic disturbances are compensated using the fuzzy logic system and the disturbance 
observer, respectively. Moreover, to offer precise desired tracking of the QUAV system, the PPC technique is used. In [37], a sliding 
mode control combined with a fixed-time extended disturbance observer technique is suggested for the QUAV’s tracking with wind 
disturbance. In this paper, the wind disturbances are approximated using the extended disturbance observer. In [38], the disturbed 
QUAV’s tracking is explored by means of the adaptive fixed-time controller based on the super-twisting control approach. In [39], a 
super-twisting second-order SMC approach is advised for the disturbed QUAV’s tracking. However, the uncertain trajectories of QUAV 
have not been estimated in the references [36–39] using a nonlinear disturbance observer. In [40], a nonlinear disturbance observer 
inspired by reinforcement learning is proposed for the QUAV’s tracking with parametric uncertainty and unmodeled dynamics. In fact, 
uncertain parameters and unmodeled dynamics are estimated using the nonlinear disturbance observer. Moreover, for obtaining 
observer gains, a reinforcement learning algorithm is adopted. In [41], an adaptive fixed-time control combined with the fuzzy 
backstepping approach is designed for the uncertain QUAV’s tracking. In this paper, the fuzzy logic controller is used to estimate 
uncertainties. However, in papers [40,41], the reaching law control procedure has not been applied to guarantee fast reachability and 
diminish the chattering phenomenon. In [42], the adaptive reaching law based on the super-twisting SMC technique is proposed for 
trajectory tracking control of drones subject to uncertainty and disturbance. This technique provides robust and fast-tracking control of 
the drone system; though, the state uncertainty has not been considered in [42], while in the proposed method, the state uncertainty 
has been denied using the VGESO technique.
As can be observed from the review of recent research, the variable gain extended state observer has not been applied for the 
rejection and compensation of the external disturbances that exist in the quad-rotor systems. Thus, the main research novelty of the 
proposed observer for the rejection of the external disturbances in the quad-rotor system includes an accurate estimation response 
compared to the previously recommended observers and the fast estimation of the external disturbances in comparison with the 
existing method. Furthermore, the integration of the VGESO with the SMRLC method not only offers the above advantages but also 
presents some benefits like fast and accurate tracking control of the quad-rotor system in the presence of external disturbance in 
comparison with the existing method. In conclusion, the novel contribution of this paper lies in its integration of several advanced 
control techniques to address the challenges of tracking control for QUAV systems in the presence of dynamic disturbances and un­
certain states. Here are the specific novel contributions outlined in the paper: 1. Integration of VGESO: The paper proposes the use of 
VGESO to approximate uncertain states of the QUAV system and accurately estimate dynamic disturbances. This is a novel aspect, as 
VGESO combines the benefits of extended state observers with variable gain control, which allows for effective disturbance rejection 
and state estimation even in the presence of uncertainties. 2. Application of SMRLC: SMRLC is employed for tracking control of the 
QUAV systems. The paper introduces a sliding mode reaching law surface based on the desired tracking errors between estimated 
states and desired values. This approach ensures fast reachability of the tracking error and helps to mitigate the chattering phe­
nomenon commonly associated with sliding mode control techniques. 3. Exponential Convergence of Approximation Errors: The paper 
demonstrates that the approximation errors of VGESO converge exponentially, indicating the effectiveness and accuracy of the 
observer in estimating uncertain states and dynamic disturbances. This contributes to the robustness of the overall control system. 4. 
Simulation and Hardware-in-Loop (HiL) Validation: The paper presents simulation outcomes using MATLAB/Simulink to validate the 
proposed control scheme in a virtual environment. Additionally, HiL validation using real-time hardware demonstrates the feasibility 
and effectiveness of the control method in practical scenarios.
This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces the dynamical model of the quad-rotor UAV. Section 3 details the primary 
design method. Section 4 provides simulation and HiL results, and Section 5 presents the conclusions.
Y. Yi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Journal of the Franklin Institute 363 (2026) 108511 
2

## Page 3

2. Dynamical model of the quad-rotor UAV
In addressing the design problem, the initial step in the tracking control design for the QUAV system involves introducing the QUAV 
model and its components. Drawing inspiration from previous studies like [43] that investigate QUAV tracking, the disturbed 
quad-rotor model is described as follows: 
˙xk(t) = x ˙k(t), (∀k = ϕ, θ, ψ, x, y, z )
(1) 
˙x ˙ϕ(t) = α1x˙θ(t)x ˙ψ(t) + α2x ˙ϕ
2(t) + α3Ωx˙θ(t) + d
Ix
uϕ(t) + Ⅎϕ(t)
(2) 
Table 1 
Constant parameters of quad-rotor [44].
Variables
Definition
Variable
Definition
Jr
Drag force’s coefficient
m
Mass
[
Ix, Iy, Iz
]
Inertia
d
Distance among rotational axes
[
Kfdx, Kfdy, Kfdz
]
Drag force’s coefficient
CD
Gravitational quantity
[
Kfax, Kfay, Kfaz
]
Aerodynamic friction’s coefficient
g
standard acceleration due to gravity on Earth's surface
Fig. 1. The block diagram of the proposed method.
Table 2 
Constant parameters of the quad-rotor [44].
Constant
Unit
Quantity
m
Kilogram
0.486
d
Meter
0.25
Ix = Iy
Nanometer/(Radian/(s2))
3.8278e −
3
Iz
Nanometer/(Radian/(s2))
7.6566e −
3
Jr
Nanometer/(Radian/(s2))
2.8385e −
5
Kfaz = Kfdz
Newton/Radian/s
6.3540e −
4
Kfdx = Kdy = Kfax = Kfay
Newton/Radian/s
5.5670e −
4
Kp
Nanometer/(Radian/s)
2.9842e −
3
Cdd
Nanometer/(Radian/s)
32320e −
3
Table 3 
Desired value and external disturbance.
[
xϕd, xθd, xψd
]T = [0.1.sin(t + 1), 0.1.cos(t + 1), 0.005t]T
[
xxd(t), xyd(t), xzd(t)
]T = [0.75, 0.5, 0.25]T
Ⅎk(t) = 0.05.sin(2πt)
Y. Yi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Journal of the Franklin Institute 363 (2026) 108511 
3

## Page 4

Fig. 3. Three-dimensional tracking of the desired attitude of the QUAV system using the SMRLC-based-VGESO.
Fig. 4. Tracking of the desired position of QUAV system using the SMRLC-based-VGESO.
Table 4 
Control factors value.
λi,k = 0.1, (i = 2,7), λi,k = 10,(i = 1,3,5,6)
κi = 0.5, (i = 1,2)
xk(0) = x ˙k(0) = xkdis(0) = 0.1
γik = 0.5,i = 1,2,3
ck = 50
̂xk(0) = ̂x ˙k(0) = −
0.1
Y. Yi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Journal of the Franklin Institute 363 (2026) 108511 
4

## Page 5

˙x˙θ(t) = α4x ˙ϕ(t)x ˙ψ(t) + α5x˙θ
2(t) + α6Ωx ˙ϕ(t) + d
Iy
uθ(t) + Ⅎθ(t)
(3) 
˙x ˙ψ(t) = α7x ˙ϕ(t)x˙θ(t) + α8x ˙ψ
2(t) + CD
Iz
uψ(t) + Ⅎψ(t)
(4) 
˙x ˙x(t) = α9x ˙x(t) + cos
(
xϕ(t)
)
sin(xθ(t))cos(xψ(t)) + sin
(
xϕ(t)
)
sin(xψ(t))
m
uz(t) + Ⅎx(t)
(5) 
˙x ˙y(t) = α10x ˙y(t) + cos
(
xϕ(t)
)
sin(xθ(t))sin(xψ(t)) −sin
(
xϕ(t)
)
cos(xψ(t))
m
uz(t) + Ⅎy(t)
(6) 
˙x ˙z(t) = α11x ˙z(t) −g + cos
(
xϕ(t)
)
cos(xθ(t))
m
uz(t) + Ⅎz(t)
(7) 
while α1 = Iy−Iz
Ix , α2 = −Kfax
Ix , α3 = −Jr
Ix , α4 = Iz−Ix
Iy , α5 = −Kfay
Iy , α6 = Jr
Iy, α7 = Ix−Iy
Iz , α8 = −Kfaz
Iz , α9 = −Kfdx
m ,α10 = −Kfdy
m ,α11 = −Kfdz
m . The term Ⅎk(t)
denotes the dynamic disturbance and the expression Ω is considered as Ω = w1 −w2 + w3 −w4, which wi, i = 1, 2, 3, 4 are the angular 
velocities that satisfy the subsequent equation as follows: 
uz = Kp
(
w2
1 + w2
2 + w2
3 + w2
4
)
(8) 
uϕ = −Kpw2
1 + Kpw2
3
(9) 
uθ = −Kpw2
2 + Kpw2
4
(10) 
uψ = CD
(
w2
1 −w2
2 + w2
3 −w2
4
)
(11) 
where Kp is the factor of lift power. Moreover, all of the required variables that have been used in the dynamic model of the UAV system 
are defined in Table 1. Additionally, the uϕ(t), uθ(t), uψ(t), and uz(t) are four main controllers in the quad-rotor system.
Fig. 5. Attitude tracking of QUAV via the SMRLC-based-VGESO.
Y. Yi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Journal of the Franklin Institute 363 (2026) 108511 
5

## Page 6

Remark 1.
[44,45]: To overcome the challenges arising from the underactuated nature of quad-rotor systems—where the number of 
available control inputs is fewer than the degrees of freedom to be regulated—achieving complete state regulation becomes nontrivial. 
In addition to the primary control signals uϕ(t), uθ(t), uψ(t), and uz(t), auxiliary control inputs are generated through the coupling 
between translational and rotational dynamics. Incorporating these auxiliary signals into the overall control law enhances the 
robustness of the quad-rotor platform. Therefore, the auxiliary control signals ux(t) and uy(t) are designed as 
ux(t) =
(
cos
(
xϕ(t)
)
sin(xθ(t))cos(xψ(t)) + sin
(
xϕ(t)
)
sin(xψ(t))
)
(12) 
uy(t) =
(
cos
(
xϕ(t)
)
sin(xθ(t))sin(xψ(t)) −sin
(
xϕ(t)
)
cos(xψ(t))
)
(13) 
By substituting the designed auxiliary control signals ux and uy, as equations (12) and (13), into equations (5) and (6), we have 
˙x ˙x(t) = α9x ˙x(t) + uz(t)
m ux(t) + Ⅎx(t)
(14) 
˙x ˙y(t) = α10x ˙y(t) + uz(t)
m uy(t) + Ⅎy(t)
(15) 
Accordingly, the complete dynamical formulation of the quadrotor system in the presence of external disturbances can be expressed 
as 
˙xk(t) = x ˙k(t)
(16) 
˙x ˙k(t) = fk(x(t)) + bkuk(t) + Ⅎk(t) (∀k = ϕ, θ, ψ, x, y, z )
(17) 
while xk(t) = [ϕ, θ, ψ, x, y, z]T and x ˙k(t) = [ ˙ϕ, ˙θ, ˙ψ, ˙x, ˙y, ˙z]T are the state vectors of the quad-rotor system, and the terms bk(t) and 
fk(x(t)) are given as follows: 
Fig. 6. Estimation of states of QUAV’s position using VGESO.
Y. Yi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Journal of the Franklin Institute 363 (2026) 108511 
6

## Page 7

⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
bϕ = d
Ix
, bθ = d
Iy
, bψ = CD
Iz
bx = uz(t)
m , by = uz(t)
m , bz = cos
(
xϕ(t)
)
cos(xθ(t))
m
(18) 
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
fϕ(x(t)) = α1x˙θ(t)x ˙ψ(t) + α2x ˙ϕ
2(t) + α3Ωx˙θ(t) fθ(x(t)) = α4x ˙ϕ(t)x ˙ψ(t) + α5x˙θ
2(t) + α6Ωx ˙ϕ(t)fψ(x(t))
= α7x ˙ϕ(t)x˙θ(t) + α8x ˙ψ
2(t)fx(x(t)) = α9x ˙x(t)fy(x(t)) = α10x ˙y(t)fz(x(t))
= α11x ˙z(t) −g
(19) 
Now, in order to design the disturbance observer, the following state-space form of the dynamical model (16-17) is rewritten as 
˙xk(t) = x ˙k(t)
(20) 
˙x ˙k(t) = fk(x(t)) + bkuk(t) + xkdis(t)(∀k = ϕ, θ, ψ, x, y, z )
(21) 
˙xkdis(t) = Nk(t)
(22) 
where xkdis(t) = Ⅎ2,k(t).
Assumption 1.
The disturbance Ⅎk(t) and the variable Nk(t) are considered to be bounded as 
|xkdis(t)| ≤Ⅎkm
(23) 
|Nk(t)| ≤nkm (∀k = ϕ, θ, ψ, x, y, z )
(24) 
where Ⅎkm and nkm are positive constants.
Fig. 7. Estimation of states of QUAV’s position using the VGESO.
Y. Yi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Journal of the Franklin Institute 363 (2026) 108511 
7

## Page 8

3. Main result
In this section, the main control theory, including the design of the VGESO, and the proposition of the SMRLC technique, is pre­
sented for the QUAV’s tracking with respect to the exterior perturbation.
Lemma 1.
[46] (Sylvester Criterion): Let M ∈Rn×n be a symmetric matrix and Dj = det
(
Mj
)
denote the determinant of the j ×j leading 
principal submatrix of M. Then, M is positive definite if and only if 
D1 > 0, D2 > 0, ⋯, Dn > 0
(25) 
while it is negative definite if and only if 
D1 < 0, D2 < 0, ⋯, Dn < 0
(26) 
3.1. VARIABLE GAIN EXTENDED STATE OBSERVER
Now, an active disturbance rejection control is designed to compensate for the dynamic disturbance that exists in the dynamic 
model of the QUAV system. To accomplish the disturbance rejection control, the following variable gain extended state observer is 
designed as 
˙̂xk(t) = ̂x ˙k(t) + 3δ0f1k(e1k(t))e1k(t)
(27) 
˙̂x ˙k(t) = fk(x(t)) + bkuk(t) + ̂xkdis(t) + 3δ0
2f1k(e1k(t))e1k(t)
(28) 
˙̂xkdis(t) = δ0
3f1k(e1(t))e1(t), (∀k = ϕ, θ, ψ, x, y, z )
(29) 
in which ̂xk(t) = [̂ϕ, ̂θ, ̂ψ, ̂x, ̂y, ̂z]T, ˙̂x ˙k(t) = [ ˙̂ϕ, ˙̂θ, ˙̂ψ, ˙̂x, ˙̂y, ˙̂z]Twhere δ0 is the bandwidth parameter, and ek(t) is the estimation error 
Fig. 8. Estimation of states of QUAV’s attitude using VGESO.
Y. Yi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Journal of the Franklin Institute 363 (2026) 108511 
8

## Page 9

which is defined as follows 
e1k(t) = xk(t) −̂xk(t)
(30) 
e2k(t) = x ˙k(t) −̂x ˙k(t)
δ0
(31) 
e3k(t) = xkdis(t) −̂xkdis(t)
δ0
2
(32) 
The nonlinear function f1k(e1k(t)) is considered as 
f1k(e1k(t)) = γ1k + γ2kexp
(
−γ3k|e1k(t)|
)
(33) 
where γik, i = 1, 2, 3 are positive constants. By taking the time-derivative from the equations (30)-(32), and substitution from (20–22) 
and (27–29), we have 
˙e1k(t) = e2k(t) −3δ0f1k(e1k(t))e1k(t)
(34) 
˙e2k(t) = δ0e3k(t) −3δ0f1k(e1k(t))e1k(t)
(35) 
˙e3k(t) = Nk(t)
δ0
2 −δ0f1k(e1k(t))e1k(t)
(36) 
Theorem 1.
Presume that variable gain disturbance observer is designed as (27–29) with design parameters as (46–47), then the 
estimation error ek(t) is converged to the region Πk2, which is defined as follows: 
Πk2 =
{
‖ ek(t)‖≤2 ‖ BkΓk‖Nk(t)
δ0
3ζkλkmin(Γk)
}
(37) 
Proof: Let the Lyapunov’s function be as 
Fig. 9. Estimation of states of QUAV system’s attitude using VGESO.
Y. Yi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Journal of the Franklin Institute 363 (2026) 108511 
9

## Page 10

Vk(ek(t)) = ekT(t)Γkek(t)
δ0
(38) 
where 
Γk =
⎡
⎣
1
−0.5
−1
−0.5
1
−0.5
−1
−0.5
4
⎤
⎦
(39) 
Hence, it can be gained that 
λkmin(Γk)‖ek(t)‖≤δ0Vk(ek(t)) ≤λkmax(Γk)‖ ek(t) ‖
(40) 
The vector of ˙ek(t) is calculated as following based on Eqs. (34)-(36)
˙ek(t) = δ0Ak(ek(t))ek(t) + Bk
Nk(t)
δ0
2
(41) 
where 
Ak(e1k(t)) =
⎡
⎣
3f1k(e1k(t))
1
0
−3f1k(e1k(t))
0
1
−f1k(e1k(t))
0
0
⎤
⎦
(42) 
Bk = [0 0 1]T
(43) 
Now, consider 
Akt = Ak(e1k(t))TΓk + ΓkAk(e1k(t)) =
⎡
⎣
−f1k(e1k(t))
1 −f1k(e1k(t))
0.5
(
f1k(e1k(t)) −1
)
1 −f1k(e1k(t))
−1
0
0.5
(
f1k(e1k(t)) −1
)
0
−1
⎤
⎦
(44) 
Now, time-derivative of the Eq. (38) is obtained below 
Fig. 10. Time history of the desired tracking error Ek(t).
Y. Yi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Journal of the Franklin Institute 363 (2026) 108511 
10

## Page 11

˙Vk(e1k(t)) = −ζk‖ek(t)‖2+2 ‖BkΓk‖‖ek(t)‖ Nk(t)
δ0
3
(45) 
whereas ζ1k and ζ2k satisify the following conditions 
ζ1k ∈
(7 −2
̅̅̅
6
√
5
, 7 + 2
̅̅̅
6
√
5
)
(46) 
ζ1k + ζ2k ∈
(7 −2
̅̅̅
6
√
5
, 7 + 2
̅̅̅
6
√
5
)
(47) 
The sequential principal minors Akt are as 
D1k = −f1k(e1k(t))
(48) 
D2k = −f1k(e1k(t))2 + 3 f1k(e1k(t)) −1
(49) 
D3k = 1.25
(
f1k(e1k(t))2 −2.8 f1k(e1k(t)) + 1
)
(50) 
Therefore, it can be observed that D1k and D2k are negative, and D3k is positive, hence, it can be concluded that Akt is always a 
negative definite matrices such that there is a positive scalar ζk with Akt ≤ζkI3. Thus, we have 
‖ ek(t)‖≤
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
δ0Vk(ek(t0))
λkmin(Γk)
√
exp
(
−
ζkδ0
2λkmax(Γk) (t −t0)
)
+ 2 ‖ BkΓk‖Nk(t)
δ0
3ζkλkmin(Γk)
(
1 −exp
(
−
ζkδ0
2λkmax(Γk) (t −t0)
))
(51) 
It means that estimation error converges to region Πk2 exponentially. The prrof is completed.
Remark 2.
The selected interval for ζ1k and ζ1k + ζ2k, defined in equations (46) and (47), are obtained based on the employment of 
the Sylvester criterion (Lemma 1) to the symmetric matrix Akt, defined in (44). Assuring the negative definiteness conditions of all 
sequential principal minors D1k, D2k, and D3k, as defined in (48–49), the valid range of the nonlinear gain f1k(e1k(t)) is specified. By 
assigning the minimum valid range to ζ1k and the maximum valid range to ζ1k + ζ2k, it can ensure that Akt is negative definite, 
confirming the estimation error converges to region Πk2 exponentially.
Fig. 11. Time history of the desired tracking error ˙Ek(t).
Y. Yi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Journal of the Franklin Institute 363 (2026) 108511 
11

## Page 12

3.2. SLIDING MODE REACHNG LAW CONTROL METHOD
To accomplish the QUAV’s tracking below the exterior disturbance, a sliding mode reaching law control approach is adopted in this 
section. For this reason, the desired tracking error is defined as 
Ek(t) = ̂xk(t) −xkd(t)
(52) 
˙Ek(t) = ̂x ˙k(t) −
˙xkd(t)
(53) 
Taking time-derivative from the above equations and considering equations (27)-(29) results in 
˙Ek(t) = ˙̂xk(t) −
˙xkd(t) = ̂x ˙k(t) + 3δ0f1k
(
e1k(t)
)
e1k(t) −
˙xkd(t) = ˙Ek(t) + 3δ0f1k
(
e1k(t)
)
e1k(t)
(54) 
¨Ek(t) = ˙̂x ˙k(t) −
¨xkd(t) = fk(x(t)) + bkuk(t) + ̂xkdis(t) + 3δ0
2f1k(e1k(t))e1k(t) −
¨xkd(t)
(55) 
Now, the sliding reaching law surface is proposed as 
sk(t) = ˙Ek(t) + ckEk(t)
(56) 
where ck > 0 and 
˙sk(t) = ¨Ek(t) + ck ˙Ek(t) = −λ1,k.sign(sk(t)).
(
λ2,k
λ2,k + λ3,k
)
−λ4,k.sk(t) −λ5,k.|sk(t)|κ1.λ2,k
κ2.sign(sk(t)) −λ6,k.
(
eλ7,k −1
)
.sign(sk(t))
(57) 
where λi,k > 0, i = 1,3,4,5,6,7, λ2,k =
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
Ek(t)2 + ˙Ek(t)2
√
, and 0 < κi < 1, i = 1,2. Substitution from (54) and (55) into (57) leads to 
fk(x(t)) + ̂xkdis(t) + 3δ0
2f1k(e1k)e1k(t) −
¨xkd(t) + ck ˙Ek(t) + 3ckδ0f1k(e1k)e1k(t)
+bkuk(t) + λ1,k.sign(sk(t)).
(
λ2,k
λ2,k + λ3,k
)
+ λ4,k.sk(t) + λ5,k.|sk(t)|κ1.λ2,k
κ2.sign(sk(t))
+λ6,k.
(
eλ7,k −1
)
.sign(sk(t)) = 0
(58) 
Fig. 12. Trajectories of the sliding mode reaching law surface.
Y. Yi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Journal of the Franklin Institute 363 (2026) 108511 
12

## Page 13

Now, the sliding mode reaching law controller-based disturbance observer is considered as 
uk(t) = −1
bk
[
fk(x(t))+ ̂xkdis(t)+3δ0
2f1k(e1k(t))e1k(t)−¨xkd(t)+ck ˙Ek(t)+3ckδ0f1k(e1k)e1k(t)+λ1,k.sign(sk(t)).
(
λ2,k
λ2,k +λ3,k
)
+λ4,k.sk(t)
+λ5,k.|sk(t)|κ1.λ2,k
κ2.sign(sk(t))+λ6,k.
(
eλ7,k −1
)
.sign(sk(t))
]
(59) 
Remark 3.
The structure and role of the reaching law part of the controller are described as follows: The term 
λ6,k.(eλ7,k −1).sign(sk(t)) is called the dominant factor which forces the state trajectories toward the sliding surface. About the expression 
−
λ1,k.sign(sk(t)).
(
λ2,k
λ2,k+λ3,k
)
, when the state trajectories are far away from the sliding surface, the term 
λ2,k
λ2,k+λ3,k is equal to 1. Since λ2,k 
converges to zero, the value 
λ2,k
λ2,k+λ3,k decreases and finally becomes equal to zero.
Now, the following Theorem is presented to prove the fast convergence of the sliding mode reaching law surface, which leads to the 
convergence of the desired tracking error that demonstrates the desired tracking of the QUAV system under dynamic disturbance.
Theorem 2.
Consider the dynamic model of the QUAV system with uncertain states and dynamic disturbance as (16–19). If the 
disturbance and state observer design as (27–29), and the tracking errors are as (52) and (53), with the usage of the sliding mode 
reaching law surface (56–57), and the sliding mode reaching law controller-based disturbance observer (59), desired tracking of the 
QUAV system subject to the uncertain states and dynamic disturbance is done.
Proof: The Lyapunov function is constructed as follows 
V1,k(t) = 1
2sk
2(t)
(60) 
Taking time-derivative of the equation (60) and substitution from the equation results in 
˙V1,k(t) = sk(t)
[
fk(x(t)) + ̂xkdis(t) + 3δ0
2f1k(e1k(t))e1k(t) −¨xkd(t) + ck ˙Ek(t) + 3ckδ0f1k(e1k(t))e1k(t) + bkuk(t)
]
(61) 
Considering sliding mode reaching law controller, one can attain 
Fig. 13. Position and roll control input signals.
Y. Yi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Journal of the Franklin Institute 363 (2026) 108511 
13

## Page 14

˙V1,k(t) = sk(t)
[
−λ1,k.sign(sk(t)).
(
λ2,k
λ2,k + λ3,k
)
−λ4,k.sk(t) −λ5,k.|sk(t)|κ1.λ2,k
κ2.sign(sk(t)) −λ6,k.
(
eλ7,k −1
)
.sign(sk(t))
]
(62) 
where 
˙V1,k(t) ≤−λ1,k.sign(sk).
(
λ2,k
λ2,k + λ3,k
)
.sk(t) −λ4,k.sk
2(t) −λ5,k.|sk(t)|κ1.λ2,k
κ2.sign(sk(t))sk(t) −λ6,k.
(
eλ7,k −1
)
.sign(sk(t))sk(t)
(63) 
whereas sign(sk(t))sk(t) = |sk(t)| and 
λ1,k > 0, λ2,k > 0, λ3,k > 0 ⇒λ1,k.
(
λ2,k
λ2,k + λ3,k
)
> 0
(64) 
λ5,k > 0, 0 < κi < 1 ⇒λ5,k.|sk(t)|κ1.λ2,k
κ2 > 0
(65) 
Therefore 
[
λ1,k.
(
λ2,k
λ2,k + λ3,k
)
+ λ5,k.|sk(t)|κ1.λ2,k
κ2 −λ6,k.
(
eλ7,k −1
)]
|sk(t)| > 0
(66) 
Then, we have 
˙V1,k(t) ≤−
[
λ1,k.
(
λ2,k
λ2,k + λ3,k
)
+ λ5,k.|sk(t)|κ1.λ2,k
κ2 −λ6,k.
(
eλ7,k −1
)]
|sk| −λ4,k.sk
2(t) ≤−λ4,k.sk
2(t) ≤−2λ4,kV1,k(t) ≤0
(67) 
It guarantees that the convergence of the sliding mode reaching law is done. Hence, the desired tracking error is converged to zero, 
and then, desired tracking control of the QUAV is completed.
Remark 4.
Fig. 1 illustrates the schematic of the proposed control method based on integrating VGESO with the SMRLC technique. 
The observer's responsibility includes meticulous approximation of both the system’s uncertain states and external dynamic distur­
bances. The estimated values of the uncertain states integrate with SMRLC to provide a robust control method for trajectory tracking 
control of the quad-rotor system with uncertain states and external disturbances.
Fig. 14. Pitch and yaw control input signals.
Y. Yi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Journal of the Franklin Institute 363 (2026) 108511 
14

## Page 15

Remark 5.
[47–50]: In order to enhance the viability, robustness, and practical performance of the quad-rotor system in real-time 
applications, it is essential to account for input saturation during the controller design stage. Quad-rotor actuators, such as motors and 
propellers, are subject to physical limitations in terms of maximum and minimum thrust generation, which directly impose constraints 
on the control inputs. Ignoring these constraints in the control design may lead to infeasible control commands, actuator saturation, 
degraded tracking accuracy, or even instability in practical operation. By explicitly incorporating input saturation into the controller 
formulation, the designed control laws remain realistic and implementable on the actual hardware, thereby improving system reli­
ability and safety. The proposed controller incorporates input saturation constraints, thereby guaranteeing that the generated control 
signals remain within the physical limits of the quadrotor actuators. Hence, the equations (2)-(7) are represented in the presence of 
input saturation as 
˙x ˙ϕ(t) = fϕ(x(t)) + bϕsat
(
uϕ(t)
)
+ Ⅎϕ(t)
(68) 
˙x˙θ(t) = fθ(x(t)) + bθsat(uθ(t)) + Ⅎθ(t)
(69) 
Fig. 15. Trajectories of the VGESO.
Table 5 
Genetic algorithm parameters.
Population Size = 30
Number of Generation = 20
Number of variables = 6
Mutation rate =0.01
Lower bound = 10
Upper bound = 500
Crossover rate = 0.5
β = 0.5
J1 = 0.01
J2 = 0.02
J3 = 0.03
​
Table 6 
Parameters of the proposed controller using the genetic algorithm.
δ0ϕ = 138.2422
δ0θ = 55.9375
δ0ψ = 10
δ0x = 17.6562
δ0y = 23.3984
δ0z = 42.5391
Y. Yi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Journal of the Franklin Institute 363 (2026) 108511 
15

## Page 16

˙x ˙ψ(t) = fψ(x(t)) + bψsat(uψ(t)) + Ⅎψ(t)
(70) 
˙x ˙x(t) = fx(x(t)) + ux(t)
m sat(uz(t)) + Ⅎx(t)
(71) 
˙x ˙y(t) = fy(x(t)) + uy(t)
m sat(uz(t)) + Ⅎy(t)
(72) 
˙x ˙z(t) = fz(x(t)) + bzsat(uz(t)) + Ⅎz(t)
(73) 
where sat(uk(t)) = H kuk(t), (∀k = ϕ, θ, ψ, z ), while H k, (∀k = ϕ, θ, ψ, z ), is designed as 
H k =
{
1, |uk(t)| < ukmax
sign(uk(t))ukmax/uk(t), otherwise
(74) 
where ukmax is the maximum value of the control signal.
4. SIMULATION AND HiL RESULTS
In this section, we intend to thoroughly investigate the performance of the suggested control approach, named VGESO-based 
SMRLC, using both pure simulation results and HiL implementations. Pure simulations were conducted in the MATLAB/Simulink 
environment to investigate the suggested controller's performance in the presence of dynamic disturbances and state uncertainties. To 
bridge the gap between control theory and practical applications, we used the proposed control approach to a Speedgoat real-time 
target machine for HiL simulation. In addition, to fully demonstrate the efficiency and superiority of the recommended strategy, 
we offered a detailed comparison with existing control strategy [45]. Performance data such as Integral of Absolute Error (IAE), 
settling time, and convergence rate are presented and studied for a variety of circumstances.
Fig. 2. Cost function minimization.
Table 7 
Settling time.
Existed method [45]
SMRLC-based-VGESO
Existed method [45]
SMRLC-based-VGESO
tsx(t)
5
0.5
tsϕ(t)
1
0.4
tsy(t)
4
0.5
tsθ(t)
1.8
0.4
tsz(t)
2.2
0.5
tsψ(t)
2.5
0.4
Table 8 
Comparison of IAE between different methods.
Existed method [45]
SMRLC-based-VGESO
IAE(Ex(t))
0.858
0.1149
IAE
(
Ey(t)
)
0.4772
0.08563
IAE(Ez(t))
0.1342
0.1079
IAE
(
Eϕ(t)
)
0.006947
0.003788
IAE(Eθ(t))
0.03045
0.02429
IAE(Eψ(t))
0.08447
0.03388
Y. Yi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Journal of the Franklin Institute 363 (2026) 108511 
16

## Page 17

4.1. SIMULATION RESULTS
In the subsequent section, the simulation results using the SMRLC-based VGESO technique on the QUAV system with the actual 
constant parameters listed in Table 2 are provided. For the implementation of the simulation, the desired value, external disturbance, 
and control parameters are considered in Table 3 and Table 4, which have been tuned based on the trial-and-error method. In addition, 
the proposed control method is compared to the existing method [45].
As one can observe from the simulation figures, the desired tracking control of the QUAV system based on the SMRLC method has 
been done accurately, and the VGESO approach has worked correctly compared to the existing method [45]. To ensure a fair com­
parison, we applied the same trial-and-error tuning process to all methods evaluated. Therefore, to demonstrate the QUAV’s tracking 
performance under external disturbance, the trajectories of 3-dimensional attitude tracking, position tracking, and attitude tracking of 
the QUAV system using the SMRL-based VGESO scheme have been illustrated in Fig. 3, Fig. 4, and Fig. 5, respectively. According to 
these figures, it can be observed that states of the QUAV system track the desired values and route appropriately compared to the 
existing technique [45]. Afterward, for the assurance of the accuracy of the designed state observer based on the VGESO approach, the 
Fig. 17. Tracking of the desired position of the QUAV system based on the proposed method using real-time simulation.
Fig. 16. HiL setup.
Table 9 
Characteristics of different parts of the HiL setup.
1
power supply
8–36 VDC input range with external adapter for AC 100–240 V, 50/60 Hz and power consumption: 15W
2
storage
main drive standard (64GB SSD)
3
Mainboard & CPU
Intel Celeron 3 GHz 4cores/ operating system: Simulink Real-Time/ Memory: 4GB DDR3 RAM
4
mechanical specifications
Fanless design, Height: 80 mm, Depth: 190 mm, Width: 210 mm, and Weight: 2.6kg
Y. Yi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Journal of the Franklin Institute 363 (2026) 108511 
17

## Page 18

time history of the estimation has been displayed in Fig. 6–Fig. 9, respectively. Inspired by these figures, it can be seen that the VGESO 
estimates the uncertain states of the QUAV system suitably. Moreover, the correctness of the desired tracking control of the QUAV 
system is demonstrated based on the reachability of the tracking error, which is converged to zero, which has been shown in Fig. 10 
and Fig. 11, respectively. Additionally, trajectories of the SMRL surfaces have been displayed in Fig. 12 which guarantees the fast 
convergence of the switching surface to zero compared to the existing method [45]. Additionally, control inputs utilizing the 
SMRL-based VGESO method are shown in Fig. 13 and Fig. 14, respectively. Thus, it can be observed that control inputs have 
appropriate amplitude without any chattering. In order to assert the proficiency of the VGESO technique for the approximation of the 
external disturbance, time responses of the external disturbances and their estimation based on VGESO have been illustrated in Fig. 15. 
With respect to this figure, it can be concluded that external disturbances that exist in the QUAV system are approximated and rejected 
properly compared to the existed method [45]. Based on the simulation results shown in Fig. 15, it can be concluded that the primary 
innovation of the proposed observer for rejecting external disturbances in the quad-rotor system lies in its accurate approximation 
response compared to previously suggested observers, and its rapid approximation of external disturbances compared to existing 
methods.
Inspired by the provided figures and the above explanation, it can be concluded that the desired tracking control of the QUAV 
system subject to state uncertainty and external disturbance has been done appropriately, and uncertain states of the QUAV system and 
external disturbance have been estimated accurately. Therefore, the efficiency and accuracy of the SMRL-based-VGESO method 
compared to the existing method [45] are proved.
Remark 6.
The parameter δ0k serves a critical role in both the SMRLC and the VGESO, as it directly affects the convergence speed and 
robustness of the closed-loop system. Due to this reason, instead of its tuning being based on the trial-and-error method, we have used a 
genetic algorithm [51] to optimize these parameters. This approach allows for a more systematic exploration of the parameter space, 
leading to improved performance and efficiency. By leveraging the principles of natural selection, the genetic algorithm can identify 
optimal solutions that might not be discovered through traditional methods. Below, the detailed explanations of the genetic algorithm, 
its cost function, and its parameter are elaborated. Accoding to the genetic algorithm approach, the cost function is considered as 
J(t) = (1 −exp(−β))H(t) + exp(−β)H(t)
(75) 
H(t) =
⎛
⎝J1
∫t
0
‖ E(τ)‖ dE(τ) + J2
∫t
0
τ ‖ E(τ)‖ dE(τ) + J3
∫t
0
‖ U(τ) ‖ dU(τ)
⎞
⎠
(76) 
Fig. 18. Tracking of the desired attitude of the QUAV system based on the proposed method using real-time simulation.
Y. Yi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Journal of the Franklin Institute 363 (2026) 108511 
18

## Page 19

where ET =
[
Eϕ,E θ,Eψ,Ex,Ey,Ez
]
, UT =
[
uϕ,u θ,uψ,uz
]
, and β,J1,J2,J3 > 0. The parameters of the applied genetic algorithm approach 
are considered in Table 5. By minimizing the cost function J(t), parameters δ0k are obtained and given in Table 6. In addition, the 
diagram that displays the values of the cost function respect to the number of generations is depicted in Fig. 2. The genetic algorithm is 
selected due to its global optimization abilities, which confirms that the selected values δ0k result in improved performance.
Remark 7.
As explained in the description of the simulation part, the proposed SMCRL mixed with VGESO method offers faster 
response compared to the existed method of [45]; thus, the settling time is given in Table 7, which demonstrates the fast convergence 
of the proposed method.
Remark 8.
At the aim of the comparison between proposed and existed methods, the performance index (Integral of Absolute of 
Error (IAE) as (77)), and their values are given in Table 8. Based on the IAE values, it can be determined that the efficiency of the 
proposed method, which combines SMRLC with VGESO, is demonstrated to be superior compared to the method in [45] 
IAE(Ek(t)) =
∫t
0
|Ek(τ)|dEk(τ)
(77) 
4.2. HiL results
According to the practical application, HiL verification and implementation play a critical role in connecting simulation to real- 
world employment. Its exceptional abilities include the validation of the suggested control approach in a realistic setting with 
sensor noise, actuator limitations, and computing delays. In contrast to previous pure simulations, HiL provides a powerful picture of 
how the controller performs in actuality and a condition that does not exist in an ideal environment. This specialized hardware 
platform is designed for real simulation and testing due to its unique implementation, Real-Time Operating System (RTOS), extensive 
I/O connectivity, simple Simulink interface, and scalability. It provides a well-developed framework for analyzing real-world control 
systems in several aspects. During the study, the connection to the monitor is the most effective technique to identify the system's 
performance in real time. The key benefit of this platform is the exploration of the extension of embedded controllers, which increases 
Fig. 19. Time history of the sliding surface using real-time simulation.
Y. Yi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Journal of the Franklin Institute 363 (2026) 108511 
19

## Page 20

Fig. 20. Estimation of states of the QUAV system ̂xk,1(t) using the VGESO in the real-time simulation.
Fig. 21. Estimation of the states of the QUAV system ̂xk,2(t) using the VGESO in real-time simulation.
Y. Yi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Journal of the Franklin Institute 363 (2026) 108511 
20

## Page 21

their productivity in performing complex tasks. Hence, in this part, the feasibility and productivity of the proposed approach utilizing 
the SMRL-based-VGESO method is investigated with the usage of the hardware-in-loop design of the Baseline real-time target machine. 
The HiL setup is depicted in Fig. 16.
The hardware-in-loop system consists of two crucial components: a modern, high-speed real device enhanced by a multi-core CPU 
and a programmable module within Simulink. Within this setup, the HDL coder transforms the Simulink model into either CPU or 
FPGA formats. Furthermore, MathWorks' HDL Coder is employed to translate Simscape Electrical models into VHDL code. Details 
regarding the specifications of different components of the HiL configuration are provided in Table 9. After the implementation of the 
real-time simulation, the following results, including desired tracking’s trajectory, sliding surface, and VGES-observer sliding surface, 
control input, and state and disturbance VGES-observer are depicted in Fig. 17–Fig. 21, respectively, and are compared to the existed 
method [45]. The obtained results assure the efficiency of the SMRL-based-VGESO method compared to the existing method [45] in 
real applications.
5. CONCLUSION
The findings of this paper are outlined as follows: Firstly, it addresses the dynamical model of the QUAV, considering both dynamic 
disturbance and state uncertainty. Subsequently, the VGESO method is employed to estimate dynamic disturbances and uncertain 
states within the QUAV system. Following this, the SMRLC scheme is utilized to facilitate rapid tracking control of the QUAV and 
mitigate the occurrence of chattering. Finally, the efficiency and effectiveness of the proposed method are validated through simu­
lations and HiL results conducted in the MATLAB Simulink environment. In future research, further exploration of the VGESO tech­
nique will focus on addressing dynamic disturbances and uncertainties within the QUAV system, while also considering input 
saturations and time-varying delays.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Yuxuan Yi: Writing – original draft, Software, Resources, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Concep­
tualization. Omid Mofid: Writing – review & editing, Validation, Supervision, Software, Resources, Investigation, Funding acquisi­
tion, Formal analysis, Data curation. Saleh Mobayen: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, 
Supervision, Project administration, Methodology, Funding acquisition.
Declaration of interests
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to 
influence the work reported in this paper.
References
[1] S. Khaksar, L. Checker, B. Borazjan, I. Murray, Design and evaluation of an alternative control for a quad-rotor drone using hand-gesture recognition, Sensors 23 
(2023) 5462.
[2] H. Zhang, L. Yang, Position and attitude control based on single neuron PID with gravity compensation for quad rotor UAV, J. Aerosp. Technol. Manag. 15 
(2023) e1023.
[3] Y. Zhang, C. Cheng, A. Lu, Z. Huang, Numerical analysis of launch process for a foldable quad-rotor UAV, J. Phys. (2023) 112011.
[4] A. Imamura, Horizontal fixed attitude flight of quad rotor helicopter with tilting rotor, J. Robot. Mechatron. 35 (2023) 317–327.
[5] H. Bi, T. Zou, J. Zhu, J. Liu, Adaptive super-twisting nonsingular fast terminal sliding mode fault tolerant control of a 2-DOF helicopter with input quantization, 
ISA Trans. (2025).
[6] O.T. Makki, S.S. Moosapour, S. Mobayen, J.H. Nobari, Observer-based fixed time sliding mode control for trajectory tracking of 3-DOF helicopter with 
uncertainties and input saturations, Iran. J. Sci. Technol. Trans. Electr. Eng. 49 (2025) 521–544.
[7] Y. Liang, F. Huang, Z. Qiu, X. Shu, Q. Liu, D. Yuan, Uncertainty and diversity-based active learning for UAV tracking, Neurocomputing (2025) 130265.
[8] J. Shi, J. Wu, J. Chong, Z. Yang, Collaborative spectrum sensing for Multi-UAV system: a U-net approach with uncertainty awareness, IEEe Trans. Veh. Technol. 
(2025).
[9] J. Li, L. Wu, A multiple connected recurrent neural network based super-twisting terminal sliding mode control for quad-rotor UAV, Eur. J. Control 83 (2025) 
101220.
[10] M.H. Hezaveh, M.T. Ramezanlou, H. Schwartz, I. Lambadaris, Enhancing UAV altitude control: PID tuning with reinforcement learning and genetic algorithm, 
in: 2025 IEEE International systems Conference (SysCon), IEEE, 2025, pp. 1–6.
[11] H. Baran, I. Bayezit, A.I. Jambak, Advanced UAV system utilization of LQR and ESC techniques for flight control, Aerosp. Syst. (2024) 1–18.
[12] P. Dolatyabi, J. Regan, M. Khodayar, Deep learning for traffic scene understanding: a review, IEEe Access. (2025).
[13] X. Zhou, Z. Tang, N. Wang, C. Yang, T. Huang, A novel state transition algorithm with adaptive fuzzy penalty for multi-constraint UAV path planning, Expert. 
Syst. Appl. 248 (2024) 123481.
[14] L. Yu, J. Huang, W. Luo, S. Chang, H. Sun, H. Tian, Sliding-mode control for PMLSM position control—a review. Actuators, MDPI, 2023, p. 31.
[15] D. Yao, H. Li, Y. Shi, Event-based average consensus of disturbed MASs via fully distributed sliding mode control, IEEE Trans Autom. Contr. (2023).
[16] Z. Ye, D. Zhang, C. Deng, H. Yan, G. Feng, Finite-time resilient sliding mode control of nonlinear UMV systems subject to DoS attacks, Automatica 156 (2023) 
111170.
[17] R. Afifa, S. Ali, M. Pervaiz, J. Iqbal, Adaptive backstepping integral sliding mode control of a mimo separately excited DC motor, Robotics 12 (2023) 105.
[18] C. Li, T. Pan, S. Ding, Finite-time fast integral terminal sliding mode speed control method with disturbance observer for SPMSM, IEEe Trans. Power. Electron. 
(2025).
[19] S. Wang, C. Sun, Q. Chen, H. He, Composite learning fixed-time control for nonlinear servo systems with State constraints and unknown dynamics, IEEE Trans. 
Syst. Man Cybern. (2025).
[20] M. Behnamfar, T.O. Olowu, A. Sarwat, Passivity-based integral terminal sliding mode control for suppressing output voltage fluctuations in dynamic wireless 
charging, IEEE Trans. Transp. Electrif. (2025).
Y. Yi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Journal of the Franklin Institute 363 (2026) 108511 
21

## Page 22

[21] Z. Zhang, X. Yang, W. Wang, K. Chen, N.C. Cheung, J. Pan, Enhanced sliding mode control for PMSM speed drive systems using a novel adaptive sliding mode 
reaching law based on exponential function, IEEe Trans. Ind. Electron. 71 (2024) 11978–11988.
[22] H. Wang, T. Jiao, X. Xing, Y. Yang, Speed regulation of pmsm systems based on a new sliding mode reaching law, IEEe Access. 12 (2024) 24062–24070.
[23] M. Hu, H. Ahn, J. Park, K. You, A modified exponential reaching law for sliding mode control and its applications, Int. J. Robust. Nonlinear. Control 34 (2024) 
9783–9796.
[24] G. Luo, S. Gao, Z. Jiang, C. Luo, W. Zhang, H. Wang, ROV trajectory tracking control based on disturbance observer and combinatorial reaching law of sliding 
mode, Ocean Eng. 304 (2024) 117744.
[25] J. Samantaray, S. Chakrabarty, Discrete-time sliding mode control with inverse hyperbolic sine reaching law, J. Frankl. Inst. 361 (2024) 107108.
[26] J. Park, H. Ahn, M. Hu, H. Kwon, K. You, Enhanced composite adaptive sliding mode reaching law for speed regulation in SPMSM, Results. Eng. 25 (2025) 
104567.
[27] A. Znidi, R.J. Khlif, A.S. Nouri, Discrete sliding mode control based on a new fractional order power reaching law, J. Vib. Control 30 (2024) 5196–5213.
[28] H. Ren, H. Ma, H. Li, R. Lu, A disturbance observer based intelligent control for nonstrict-feedback nonlinear systems, Sci. China Technol. Sci. 66 (2023) 
456–467.
[29] Y. Yang, Y. Xie, C. Dai, Z. Long, An improved nonlinear extended state observer with adaptive variable gain, Asian J. Control 25 (2023) 2388–2397.
[30] E. Sariyildiz, Analysis and synthesis of disturbance observer-based digital robust motion control systems in State space, IEEe Trans. Ind. Electron. (2025).
[31] F. Wei, N. Xu, S. Huang, Y. Cao, Disturbance observer–based adaptive neural finite-time control for nonstrict-feedback nonlinear systems with input delay, 
Trans. Inst. Meas. Control 47 (2025) 1172–1187.
[32] M. Luan, Y. Zhang, X. Li, F. Xu, A rotor position detection method for permanent magnet synchronous motors based on variable gain discrete sliding mode 
observer, World Electr. Veh. J. 15 (2024) 87.
[33] X. Zhang, L.-Y. Hao, H. Liu, Variable-gain extended State observer-based data-driven trajectory tracking control of unmanned marine vehicles under 
disturbances, in: 2024 IEEE 3rd Industrial Electronics Society Annual On-Line Conference (ONCON), IEEE, 2024, pp. 1–6.
[34] K. Hirasawa, H. Sawato, D. Asada, H. Oya, Synthesis of variable gain robust State observer for linear systems with structured uncertainties, IEEe Access. (2025).
[35] W.-H. Chen, H. Sun, X. Lu, A variable gain impulsive observer for perturbed Lipschitz nonlinear systems with delayed discrete measurements, Appl. Math. 
Comput. 473 (2024) 128641.
[36] W. Hu, S. Shao, Z. An, M. Chen, Prescribed performance discrete-time fuzzy carrier landing control of UAV based on disturbance observer, Int. J. Fuzzy Syst. 
(2023) 1–14.
[37] Q. Zhang, T. Wang, X. Zhu, Fixed-time extended disturbance observer-based switching control of quadrotor UAV under marine wind condition, Int. J. Dyn. 
Control (2023) 1–11.
[38] X. She, X.-M. Li, D. Yao, H. Li, R. Lu, Vision-based adaptive fixed-time uncooperative target tracking for QUAV with unknown disturbances, J. Frankl. Inst. 
(2023).
[39] M. Danesh, A. Jalalaei, R.E. Derakhshan, Auto-landing algorithm for quadrotor UAV using super-twisting second-order sliding mode control in the presence of 
external disturbances, Int. J. Dyn. Control (2023) 1–18.
[40] D. Lee, H. Ahn, J. Lee, H. Bang, Reinforcement learning-based nonlinear disturbance observer for UAV with parametric uncertainty and unmodeled dynamics. 
AIAA SCITECH 2023 Forum, 2023, p. 2357.
[41] H. Jiang, Q. Ma, J. Guo, Fuzzy-based fixed-time attitude control of QUAV with full-State constraints: theory and experiments, IEEe Trans. Fuzzy. Syst. (2023).
[42] H. Ahn, M. Hu, Y. Chung, K. You, Sliding-mode control for flight stability of quadrotor drone using adaptive super-twisting reaching law, Drones 7 (2023) 522.
[43] B. Liu, Y. Wang, O. Mofid, S. Mobayen, M.H. Khooban, Barrier function-based backstepping fractional-order sliding mode control for quad-rotor unmanned 
aerial vehicle under external disturbances, IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst. (2023).
[44] S. Mobayen, K.-H. Hsia, O. Mofid, S.S. Moosapour, T. Rojsiraphisal, Robust UAV tracker under actuator faults and external disturbances using a barrier function- 
based prescribed performance sliding mode control approach, Int. J. Dyn. Control 13 (2025) 108.
[45] P. Tang, F. Zhang, J. Ye, D. Lin, An integral TSMC-based adaptive fault-tolerant control for quadrotor with external disturbances and parametric uncertainties, 
Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 109 (2021) 106415.
[46] R.A. Horn, C.R. Johnson, Matrix Analysis, Cambridge university press, 2012.
[47] J. Wang, K.A. Alattas, Y. Bouteraa, O. Mofid, S. Mobayen, Adaptive finite-time backstepping control tracker for quadrotor UAV with model uncertainty and 
external disturbance, Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 133 (2023) 108088.
[48] J.J. Xiong, Y. Chen, RBFNN-based parameter adaptive sliding mode control for an uncertain TQUAV with time-varying mass, Int. J. Robust. Nonlinear. Control 
35 (2025) 4658–4668.
[49] J.J. Xiong, C. Li, Neuroadaptive sliding mode tracking control for an uncertain TQUAV with unknown controllers, Int. J. Robust. Nonlinear. Control 35 (2025) 
579–590.
[50] J.-J. Xiong, N.-H. Guo, J. Mao, H.-D. Wang, Self-tuning sliding mode control for an uncertain coaxial octorotor UAV, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. 53 (2022) 
1160–1171.
[51] D. Waysi, B.T. Ahmed, I.M. Ibrahim, Optimization by nature: a review of genetic algorithm techniques, Indones. J. Comput. Sci. 14 (2025).
Y. Yi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Journal of the Franklin Institute 363 (2026) 108511 
22
