# 1-s2.0-S0957417425028611-main.pdf

## Page 1

Trajectory tracking and state estimation for quadcopter UAVs using particle 
filters in an inner-outer loops controller
Vitorino Biazi a,*, Jan Nedoma b
, Carlos Marques a,c
a CICECO – Aveiro Institute of Materials Physics Department, University of Aveiro, Aveiro, Portugal
b Department of Telecommunications, VSB – Technical University of Ostrava, Ostrava 70800, Czech Replublic
c Department of Physics, VSB – Technical University of Ostrava, Ostrava 70800, Czech Republic
A R T I C L E  I N F O
Keywords:
UAVs
Particle filter
Pose estimation
Inner-outer loops control
A B S T R A C T
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs), such as quadcopters, have become widely used in high-risk applications, such 
as firefighting and rescue in earthquake regions, requiring reliability and resilience to noise and possible sensor 
failures.
Traditional state estimators like the Extended Kalman Filter (EKF) handle Gaussian noise effectively but 
struggle with nonlinearities and non-Gaussian noise. In contrast, Particle Filters (PF) offer greater robustness and 
adaptability to such conditions. This paper presents a state estimation approach for quadcopters based on PF 
integrated with an inner-outer loops controller to achieve precise positioning and trajectory tracking. The study 
aims to validate the efficiency of the proposed PF-based algorithm for UAV state estimation, even amidst noisy 
sensor data and limited measurements. Computational simulations using the Julia programming language were 
conducted for a specific quadcopter model and two different tasks were tested: spatial positioning and trajectory 
tracking. The obtained results demonstrate that the PF algorithm effectively estimated the drone’s state, allowing 
the control system to guide the UAV to the desired position or trajectory with high repeatability and accuracy. 
For the positioning task, the mean computational processing time and settling time interval are 0.108 s and 
1.6–2.6 s for 10 particles, 0.155 s and 1.8–15.2 s for 100 particles and 0.947 s and 2.0–35.6 s for 1000 particles, 
respectively. The results indicate that increasing the number of filter particles reduces initial variability in state 
estimates. However, it also increases posterior variability, computational costs, and convergence times, high­
lighting the need to balance particle count for optimal system performance.
1. Introduction
The Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs), also known as drones or 
Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS), are tools that have benefited from a 
series of recent technological advances, which have driven their use in a 
wide variety of applications over the past decade (Mohsan et al., 2022). 
Although they were initially designed for military purposes, the versa­
tility of these devices, combined with their low cost and ease of access to 
remote areas, has expanded their applicability to a variety of sectors and 
scenarios (Quamar et al., 2023). Drones are flying devices that can 
navigate and operate without the need for a human operator on board 
(C. 328, ICAO Cir 328, 2016). This feature facilitates access to areas and 
regions that would be challenging to access quickly on foot or by con­
ventional vehicles (Emimi et al., 2023). Scientific advances provided 
greater flexibility and enabled these devices to replace humans in 
factories (Deja et al., 2020) and high-risk tasks (Alon et al., 2021; Zhu 
et al., 2024), improving worker safety and health.
Some strategies have been developed to enhance the autonomy of 
robots in unstructured environments. Machine learning-based ap­
proaches, such as reinforcement learning (Delgado et al., 2022) and 
deep learning (Aggarwal et al., 2022), have proven effective for labour- 
intensive and repetitive tasks (Bruun et al., 2022). These approaches 
demonstrate high precision in performing the specific tasks they were 
trained for; however, their adaptability and generalizability remain 
limited due to this task-specific nature. Another approach is the use of 
tele-operated robots, which offer versatility across a range of tasks and 
eliminate the need for manual adjustments, as they are controlled 
remotely by skilled operators. However, these systems have certain 
limitations, such as the potential loss of connection with the operator, 
which can compromise their performance during task execution (Seo, 
* Corresponding author at: CICECO – Aveiro Institute of Materials Physics Department, University of Aveiro, 3810-193 Aveiro, Portugal.
E-mail addresses: vitorino.biazi@ua.pt (V. Biazi), jan.nedoma@vsb.cz (J. Nedoma), carlos.marques@ua.pt (C. Marques). 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Expert Systems With Applications
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/eswa
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2025.129245
Received 12 June 2025; Received in revised form 26 July 2025; Accepted 31 July 2025  
Expert Systems With Applications 296 (2026) 129245 
Available online 5 August 2025 
0957-4174/© 2025 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by- 
nc-nd/4.0/ ).

## Page 2

Miran; Gupta, Samraat; Ham, Youngjib. , 2024, 2024). Bio-inspired ro­
bots have emerged as flexible and efficient adaptive systems, designed 
by drawing inspiration from principles observed in biological organisms. 
This biologically inspired approach enhances their problem-solving ca­
pabilities, locomotion, and overall functionality, enabling them to 
effectively navigate and operate in unpredictable, unstructured envi­
ronments (Nodehi et al., 2022). Despite their promising applicability in 
the mentioned context, the practical implementation of bio-inspired 
robots still faces significant challenges. These include the difficulty of 
translating biological movements into mechanical robotics without 
sacrificing efficiency, as well as the challenge of replicating properties 
that closely resemble those of biological tissues (Abdulbaqi, 2023).
The versatility of UAVs has enabled their application across a diverse 
range of industries. In the agriculture industry, UAVs are used to 
enhance crop production by analyzing yield and quality through data 
analysis (Aasen et al., 2015). When used for spraying, precise flight 
speed control enables drones to automatically adjust the amount of 
pesticide applied to plantations, optimizing efficiency and coverage 
(Xue et al., 2016; Pan et al., 2016). UAV-assisted networks have been 
studied to provide support in natural disasters that threaten human life, 
such as earthquakes, wildfires, and biological diseases (Bushnaq et al., 
2022). The study of (Ishiwatari, 2024) highlights the role of drones in 
disaster management during the Noto Peninsula earthquake in Japan. 
These drones were essential for delivering medicine and food to isolated 
areas. Moreover, they effectively prioritized rescue efforts and resource 
allocation by using Artificial Intelligence (AI) techniques. In (Perikleous 
et al., 2024), the proposed reconfigurable multi-rotor UAV can transi­
tion between quadcopter, octocopter, and co-axial quadcopter configu­
rations without requiring mechanical modifications. Its adaptability and 
capacity to accommodate various payloads enable it to support diverse 
mission profiles in wildfire management. The paper by (Kim et al., 2017) 
explored the planning of delivery and collection of medication and test 
kits assisted by UAVs, with the objective of easing the lives of patients in 
rural areas with chronic diseases who require frequent visits to clinics 
for disease monitoring and medication refills.
When discussing the aquaculture industry and other which activities 
are operated in aquatic environments, UASs have proven to be valuable 
tools that can contribute significantly. Their ability to collect data on 
water conditions, marine life, and the speed of currents and waves in 
offshore environments help farmers optimize management and maintain 
high product quality in the aquaculture industry (Ubina and Cheng, 
2022). The use of drones to monitor fishing activity has been seen as 
promising for more sustainable use of resources and more effective 
conservation efforts (Abuthagir Iburahim et al., 2025). The oil and gas 
industry can also benefit from UAVs, especially in offshore activities. 
They can be used to monitor methane emission and to plug leaks in 
underwater pipelines, improving environmental safety (Aydin and 
Temizel, 2022). Moreover, automating dangerous and high-risk offshore 
jobs minimizes the need for human presence in potentially hazardous 
environments and improves worker safety (Daher, 2023). Another 
relevant application is in the process of integrity management of un­
derwater pipelines, in which it is possible to identify damage or oil leaks 
by monitoring them (Asadzadeh et al., 2022).
During execution of complex and high-risk tasks, UAS must 
demonstrate high reliability and minimal failure rates. It is crucial to 
ensure that all sensors monitoring the drone’s geospatial position are 
operational to maintain control over the equipment. In the event of a 
sensor failure, a practical approach is to substitute them with virtual 
sensors that can estimate the drone’s position and attitude and relay this 
information to the controller. Virtual sensors utilize the state observer 
approach to estimate non-measured variables based on the 
mathematical model that describes the drone’s dynamics and kine­
matics. Due to the coupled rotational and translational dynamics of 
UAVs, their movements are governed by nonlinear equations (Bos et al., 
2021), making traditional state observation techniques unsuitable. The 
Extended Kalman Filter (EKF) consists of one of the most widely applied 
estimators for systems with nonlinear behaviour, such as the drones 
(Jazwinski, 2007). It can be defined as a recursive state estimator 
designed for nonlinear dynamic systems influenced by noise. Its struc­
ture is very similar to that of the original Kalman Filter; however, linear 
transformations are replaced by Jacobian matrices to approximate the 
system’s nonlinear dynamics. The joint probability distribution of the 
state variables is iteratively updated using the noisy sensor measure­
ments and the system’s nonlinear dynamics. Xu et al. (Xu et al., 2021) 
designed an EKF as a state observer to enhance the accuracy of position 
and attitude feedback for a position controller, significantly improving 
the UAV’s autonomous navigation. Nevertheless, the UAV continued to 
face challenges such as low noise resistance and insufficient accuracy. 
Although EKF is a well-established technique for observers of nonlinear 
systems, it has several limitations, including the difficulty of obtaining 
Jacobian matrices for linearization, the sensitivity of its performance to 
the model’s degree of nonlinearity, and the challenge of tuning the noise 
covariance matrices (Julier and Uhlmann, 2004).
The Unscented Kalman Filter (UKF) is an alternative to the EKF that 
avoids explicit linearization of the model nonlinear functions. Instead, it 
approximates the propagation of uncertainty through nonlinear func­
tions (Julier et al., 1995). Studies have been done to prove that UKF 
performs better and has simpler implementation when compared to EKF, 
despite their similar computational complexity (Romanenko and Castro, 
2004; Kurt-Yavuz and Yavuz, 2012). Traditional filter error methods 
rely on linear approximations and Gaussian assumptions, which 
diminish their effectiveness in highly nonlinear and in the presence of 
non-Gaussian noise. A UFK was applied to fuse, another type of appli­
cation of these filters, the sensor data of the Global Positioning System 
(GPS) and of an inertial measurement unit (IMU) in a medical UAV. The 
objective was to improve the position estimation and enhance its pre­
cision, and it was verified that the UFK presented better precision in 
relation to the EFK (Navisa et al., 2023). Despite the positive points, the 
family of KF has its limitations. One important precaution when 
applying this type of filter is to ensure that the error covariance matrix 
remains always positive semi-definite. In some cases, after several iter­
ations of the UKF algorithm, the covariance matrix may lose its positive 
definiteness, potentially causing filter divergence (Zhang et al., 2020). 
When the process and measurement noise are non-Gaussian or the sys­
tem presents strong nonlinearities, traditional filters such as the EKF and 
UKF may suffer degradation and divergence (Li et al., 2016; Kishore and 
Saderla, 2024).
The study of (Khamseh, H. Bonyan; Ghorbani, S., Janabi-Sharifi, F. , 
2019) carried out a comparison between two state estimation ap­
proaches: the general UKF and the scaled spherical UKF, alongside the 
well-tuned EKF, in the context of UAV control. The analysis assessed 
estimation accuracy, overall control performance, and computational 
execution time when integrated with a Linear Quadratic Regulator 
(LQR) controller. Results indicated that the execution time of the scaled 
spherical UKF was approximately two-thirds that of the general UKF and 
half of the EKF. Under low-noise conditions, EKF and both UKFs 
demonstrated similar estimation accuracy and overall control perfor­
mance. However, the scaled spherical UKF exhibited performance 
degradation in noisy environments, whereas the general UKF showed 
greater robustness, with its performance only significantly affected 
under high noise levels. Thus, considering the superior controllability 
and observability performance of the general UKF and the reduced 
V. Biazi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Expert Systems With Applications 296 (2026) 129245 
2

## Page 3

execution time of the scaled spherical UKF, it can be concluded that the 
most suitable state estimation methodology for a UAV in a mission will 
depend on the available computational resources and the specific per­
formance metrics required for the task.
Suitable substitutes for KF family observers are the class of sequential 
Monte Carlo (SMC) methods, also referred to as particle filters (PF). 
These filters recursively compute the posterior distribution of a sto­
chastic process based on partial observations. The algorithm produces a 
series of samples, called particles, which are generated randomly ac­
cording to a probability distribution and knowledge of the system’s 
previous state. Each particle is weighted based on the likelihood of its 
state relative to the measured variables. The weight value directly in­
fluences the probability of the particle being selected in a subsequent 
resampling process to avoid degeneration (Del Moral, 1998). Key 
characteristics of the PF include ease of implementation, no requirement 
to obtain Jacobians and more accurate estimates in many scenarios, 
although it may present higher computational costs in cases where a 
high number of particles is required to obtain an accurate estimate (Liu 
and Liu, 2001). It is relevant to state that particle filters can make ac­
curate estimates even in situations where there is non-Gaussian noise 
and without prior knowledge about it (Li et al., 2020). In the study 
conducted by (Xie et al., 2019), a PF was utilized for state estimation of a 
small 3D maneuvering UAV. A ground-measuring equipment provided 
three state variables of the drone in spherical coordinates, while the 
remaining variables were observed via PF. The simulated results showed 
the effectiveness of the proposed strategy; however, it has not yet been 
implemented in a closed-loop controller for automatic spatial posi­
tioning or trajectory tracking tasks.
UAVs may face challenges such as obstacles, external disturbances, 
and parametric or non-parametric uncertainties during task execution. 
Disturbances and dynamic complexity make it challenging to design a 
robust and efficient controller to stabilize UAVs during complex tasks 
(Abdelmaksoud et al., 2020).
This paper introduces a PF-based approach for state estimation, in­
tegrated with an inner-outer loop controller, to guide a quadcopter in 
reaching a desired position or following a trajectory during task 
execution. The novelty of the paper is the use of a consolidated algo­
rithm for online and real-time quadcopter state estimation to develop a 
useful tool for scenarios that demand a high degree of reliability and 
performance from these systems. The EKF and UKF depend on Gaussian 
noise assumptions and utilize Jacobian linearization or sigma point 
techniques, respectively, for state estimation. However, these 
techniques often encounter challenges such as degradation or diver­
gence when dealing with strong nonlinearities or non-Gaussian noise. In 
contrast, the PF excels in handling stochastic processes with non- 
Gaussian noise, without requiring prior knowledge of the noise distri­
butions. This is achieved through a sequential Monte Carlo approach, 
which samples particles representing the system’s state from a proba­
bility density function, enabling greater flexibility in dynamic and un­
certain environments. This ensures efficient operation of control 
algorithms, even in scenarios involving non-Gaussian noise or sensor 
failures. Additionally, the EKF and UKF exhibit a rigid structure, 
requiring specific mathematical formulations tailored to each scenario, 
which complicates modifications. In comparison, the PF offers easier 
adaptability to diverse system models and noise profiles by simply 
adjusting the number of particles or employing different importance 
sampling strategies. Despite an already consolidated algorithm, it has 
not been used in the literature for this application and one can take 
advantage of its characteristic such as capacity to deal with non- 
linearities of the system dynamics and non-Gaussian noises, reducing 
the estimation error and the convergence time for different initial 
conditions.
This paper is divided as follows. Section 2 presents the theoretical 
background and equations related to the mathematical model which 
describes quadcopter’s kinematics and dynamics, the inverse kinematics 
and dynamics controllers and the PF algorithm. Section 3 presents the 
specifications for computational simulations and conditions necessary to 
test the estimation algorithm in conjunction with the control algorithm. 
Section 4 presents the results and comparative analysis of the tests 
conducted on the two proposed tasks, evaluated based on some perfor­
mance criteria across different particles counting on the PF. Finally, 
Section 5 assesses whether the paper successfully achieved its main 
objectives and highlights its most significant contributions.
2. Theoretical background
The mathematical model of a dynamic system is essential for tuning 
its controllers. Understanding the properties and functional character­
istics of a dynamic system, as represented by its mathematical model, 
allows for the achievement of a desired level of control by choosing the 
right values for the controller parameters. A quadcopter is a type of UAV 
characterized by six Degrees of Freedom (DoF) and is suspended and 
controlled by four thrusters powered by motors. It functions as a mul­
tiple inputs and outputs (MIMO) dynamic system, exhibiting a high 
degree of non-linearities and a complex structure, which complicates its 
mathematical modeling.
The quadcopter moves in three translational and three rotational 
directions, controlled by adjusting thruster speed and rotation. The 
forces generated by these variations in rotation induce translational 
accelerations along the three axes of the ground-fixed Cartesian system 
and rotational accelerations around the body-fixed Cartesian system. 
Fig. 1 illustrates the axes of the ground-fixed Cartesian system, relative 
to which the robot performs its translational movements, and the axes of 
the body-fixed Cartesian system, relative to which it executes its rota­
tional movements.
xg, yg and zg represents the Cartesians coordinates of the ground 
reference system, xb, yb and zb represents the Cartesians coordinates of 
the drone’s body reference system, θ, φ and ψ represents the rotation 
angles of the quadcopter in relation to the axis x, y and z coupled to its 
body, respectively. It is often necessary to perform conversions between 
the robot and ground coordinate systems as the simultaneous imple­
mentation of the particle filter and the inner-outer loops controller 
proposed in this paper. Eq. (1) is the rotation matrix which transforms 
coordinates in the drone’s body reference system to coordinates in the 
ground reference system.   
Fig. 1. Scheme showing quadcopter position relative to ground and UAV 
reference coordinate systems and its attitude angles in the UAV’s refer­
ence frame.
V. Biazi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Expert Systems With Applications 296 (2026) 129245 
3

## Page 4

In applications where aggressive maneuvers are unnecessary, such as 
fish cage and underwater pipeline inspections, the drone can be modeled 
as a horizontal platform by assuming small values for the pitch (θ) and 
roll (φ) angles (Santana et al., 2016). Based on this assumption, the Eq.1 
is simplified to the Eq. (2). 
Rg
b =
⎡
⎣
cosψ
−sinψ
0
sinψ
cosψ
0
0
0
1
⎤
⎦
(2) 
Eq. (3) presents the augmented rotation matrix to incorporate the 
yaw angle ψ as part of the states vector. The yaw angle has no effect on 
the coordinate z or on itself. The kinematics model of the drone and a 
dynamic model, presented in (Pinto et al., 2020), simplified based on the 
previous simplifications, are showed in the Eq. (4) and (5), respectively. 
R
g
b =
⎡
⎢⎢⎣
cosψ
−sinψ
0
0
sinψ
cosψ
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
⎤
⎥⎥⎦
(3) 
˙X
g = R
g
b • ˙X
b
(4) 
¨X
b = f1 • U −f2 • ˙X
b
(5) 
where ¨Xb =
[
¨xb ¨yb¨zb¨ψb]
T is the vector of accelerations in the co­
ordinates x, y, z and ψ of the drone’s body reference system, ˙Xb =
[
˙xb ˙yb ˙zb ˙ψb]T 
is the vector of velocities in the coordinates x, y, z and ψ of 
the drone’s body reference system and U =
[
uvxuvyuvzuvψ
]T is the vector of 
velocity commands to move the drone in the coordinates x, y, z and ψ of 
the drone’s body reference. f1 and f2 are diagonal matrices which 
contain parameters that differ from one model to another.
The Least Squares Method (LSM) is a technique used for process 
identification that uses the values of the system inputs and outputs, 
obtained via a physical experiment, to estimate the parameters for the 
mathematical model of system dynamics (Pang, Hui, , 2020). The 
method delivers the parameter values that minimize the sum of the 
squared errors, which represent the differences between the measured 
outputs and the estimated outputs. This can be done by setting the de­
rivative of the sum of squared errors with respect to the model param­
eters equal to zero. The parameters are then obtained from the Eq. (6). 
̂θ =
[
ΦTΦ
]−1ΦTY
(6) 
where ̂θ is the vector containing the estimated model parameters, Y is 
the vector containing the measured outputs, Φ is the regressors vector. 
In the quadcopter dynamic model presented in Eq. (5), ̂θ corresponds to 
the parameters of the diagonal matrices f1 and f2, Φ corresponds to the 
matrix mounted with the measured outputs of the quadcopter and Y 
corresponds to the vector mounted with the control inputs of the 
quadcopter. his algorithm has a recursive form whose advantage is that 
there is no need to invert matrices, reducing computational cost, in 
addition to having adaptability to deal with changes in the model. Eq. 
(7) to (9) presents the recursive LSM for system identification. 
̂θ(k + 1) = ̂θ(k) + Γ(k + 1)⋅
[
y(k + 1) −ΦT(k + 1)⋅̂θ(k)
]
(7) 
Γ(k + 1) = P(k)⋅Φ(k)⋅
[
λ + ΦT(k)⋅P(k)⋅Φ(k)
]−1
(8) 
P(k + 1) = 1
λ⋅
[
I −Γ(k + 1)⋅ΦT(k)
]
⋅P(k)
(9) 
where k is the interaction interaction being performed, λ is the forgetting 
factor, P(k) is the covariance matrix, I is the identity matrix and Γ(k) is 
the gain matrix.
The dynamic model presented in Eq. (5) is a reasonable propose since 
some models of UAVs have autopilots which limit the values of the pitch 
and roll angles. The velocities and accelerations are defined in the 
drone’s body reference frame, so the rotation matrix must be applied to 
express them in the ground reference frame. Since the roll and pitch 
angles have been assumed close to zero, the yaw angle remains constant 
between the two frames, eliminating the need for its transformation 
(Santos et al., 2019). Eq. (10) presents the dynamic model which con­
siders the state variables within the Cartesian reference frame of the 
UAV’s body. 
¨X
g = R
g
b • f1 • U −R
g
b • f2 • ˙X
b
(10) 
By solving the system iteratively with a sample time of Δt, the ve­
locities and positions in the ground reference frame can be determined 
based on the acceleration derived from Eq. (10). The discretized equa­
tions for calculating velocities and positions are presented in Eq. (11) 
and (12), respectively. 
˙X
g
k = ˙X
g
k−1 + ¨X
g
k • Δt
(11) 
Xg
k = Xg
k−1 + ˙X
g
k • Δt
(12) 
where Xg
k−1 and ˙X
g
k−1 are the vector of positions and velocities in the 
ground reference frame at the instant k −1, respectively. Xg
k, ˙X
g
k and ¨X
g
k 
are the vector of positions, velocities and accelerations in the ground 
reference frame at the instant k, respectively.
Controlling the rotation of each thruster and the forces they generate 
allows regulation of the drone’s direction and speed. The control system 
adjusts these rotations to ensure the UAV reaches its target point or 
follows a specified trajectory.
To guarantee that the robot reaches a desired position or tracks a 
specific trajectory, the controller must generate velocity commands for 
the UAV with the aim of minimizing position and velocity errors. In the 
inverse kinematics-based controller designed for a quasi-floating plat­
form (Khalil and Grizzle, 2002), the drone’s inverse kinematic model is 
used to compensate for model nonlinearities and to generate instanta­
neous velocity commands that minimize the discrepancy between the 
desired and actual drone position during a positioning task. Eq. (13)
shows the inverse kinematics controller selected to meet the re­
quirements outlined in this paper. 
vd,k =
(
R
g
b,k
)−1
•
{
˙X
g
d,k + L1 • tanh
[
L2 •
(
Xg
d,k −Xg
k−1
) ] }
(13) 
where vdk is the instantaneous velocity commands obtained from the 
controller in the instant k, 
(
R
g
b,k
)−1 
is the inverse kinematics matrix in 
instant k, Xg
d,k is the desired position vector in the instant k, ˙X
g
d,k is the 
desired velocity vector in the instant k and L1 and L2 are diagonal 
matrices with the constants of the inverse kinematics controller. The Eq. 
(13) was developed for a trajectory tracking problem. In the case of 
spatial positioning, where the target point that the drone is intended to 
Rg
b =
⎡
⎣
cosθ • cosψ
sinφ • sinθ • cosψ −cosφ • sinψ
cosφ • sinθ • cosψ + sinφ • sinψ
cosθ • sinψ
sinφ • sinθ • sinψ + cosφ • cosψ
cosφ • sinθ • sinψ −sinφ • cosψ
−sinθ
sinφ • cosθ
cosφ • cosθ
⎤
⎦
(1) 
V. Biazi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Expert Systems With Applications 296 (2026) 129245 
4

## Page 5

reach remains stationary over time, the value of ˙X
g
d,k is set to 0. To avoid 
physical saturation of the robot’s actuators, a smooth saturation func­
tion is incorporated in the control law to limit the magnitude of the 
control signals when the position error is excessively large. However, the 
velocity commands generated by the inverse kinematics controller 
cannot be instantly applied to the robot due to its mass and inertia, 
which are not considered in kinematic analysis. If a heavy vehicle needs 
to be controlled, the differences between the speed commands provided 
by the kinematic controller and those executed by the drone tend to be 
large. To avoid this problem, a dynamic compensator is needed to ensure 
more robust and efficient control in trajectory tracking and spatial 
positioning. Assuming a quadcopter whose dynamics can be modeled by 
Eq.5, Eq. (14) defines a control law derived from the inverse dynamic 
model of the UAV. 
Uk = f −1
1
(
˙vd,k + KD •
(
vd,k −
˙X
b
k−1
)
+ f2 • ˙X
b
k−1
)
(14) 
where Uk is the vector of corrected velocity commands in the instant k, 
˙vd,k is the time derived of the vector of velocity commands by the inverse 
kinematics controller in the instant k and KD is the positive definite di­
agonal control matrix. The inputs of the controller are the velocity 
commands generated from the inverse kinematic controller and the 
outputs are corrected velocity commands to handle the drone dynamics.
The particle filter algorithm operates based on the assumption that 
the probability density function of the previous system’s state p(Xk−1) is 
known. A set of particles, equivalent to system’s state, is randomly 
sampled from this probability density function. Increasing the number of 
particles generally enhances the accuracy of the algorithm; however, it 
also leads to a higher computational processing cost (Khalil and Grizzle, 
2002). After this initial selection process, Eq. (15) and (16) performs the 
prediction step of the algorithm. For each particle, the updated state of 
the system is obtained with Eq.15 and the output of the system is ob­
tained with Eq.16. 
xi,k = fk
(
xi,k−1, uk
)
(15) 
yi,k = hk
(
xi,k, wk
)
(16) 
where Xi,k−1 is the particle i selected from the probability density func­
tion of the previous interaction k −1 and Xi,k is the particle i after the 
prediction step in the interaction k. For an observation error following a 
Gaussian distribution, with a mean equal to the measured value yk and a 
variance of σ2, the weights for each particle are determined based on the 
probability of observing the estimated output associated with that par­
ticle (Eq. (17). 
qi,k =
1
σ
̅̅̅̅̅
2π
√
⋅exp
⎛
⎜
⎝−1
2⋅
[
yi,k −yk
]2
σ2
⎞
⎟
⎠
(17) 
In the subsequent step, the weights calculated in Eq. (17), repre­
senting the relative probabilities of each particle, are normalized to 
create a new discrete probability distribution (Eq. (18). 
Qi,k =
qi,k
∑N
j=1qj,k
(18) 
qi,k represents the weight of the particle i prior to normalization and Qi,k 
represents the weight of the particle i after normalization. A set of 
posterior particles is generated during the resampling step based on the 
updated probability distribution of the prior particle set. Particles with 
higher probability values tend to be selected. Finally, the vector of states 
is given by the average of the values from the posterior particle set (Eq. 
(19). 
̂xk = 1
N
∑N
j=1x+
j,k
(19) 
where x+
j,k is the resampled particle j in the instant k and ̂xk is the esti­
mated state’s vector from the PF in the instant k. From the estimated 
states in each step, it is possible to feedback to the controller the in­
formation needed to integrate the internal dynamic control and the 
external kinematic control loops.
Fig. 2. Flowchart summarizing the mathematical equations and variables relationships in the implementation of the PF estimator and the inner-outer loops 
controller to control the pose of a quadcopter UAV.
V. Biazi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Expert Systems With Applications 296 (2026) 129245 
5

## Page 6

3. Materials and methods
Fig. 2 illustrates the flowchart summarizing the complete process for 
implementing the proposed control scheme in conjunction with the PF 
estimation algorithm. The flowchart outlines the steps involved, starting 
from the initial state to the steady-state controlled quadcopter.
Initially, the system’s estimated state is randomly selected and serves 
as the input for the inverse kinematics controller. The controller outputs 
instantaneous velocity commands, which are then fed into the dynamic 
controller. Taking the system dynamics into account, the dynamic 
controller adjusts the velocity commands, which are subsequently sent 
to the quadcopter. Once the drone’s state is updated, the corrected ve­
locity commands from the dynamic controller, along with the real state 
variables measured via sensors, are provided to the PF observer. The 
prior estimated state of the system is updated using the corrected ve­
locity commands from the dynamic controller and, in the next step, 
particle weights are calculated by comparing the updated particle state 
variables with the real measured state variables. Based on the weights 
and the updated probability distributions of the particles, they are 
resampled, and the new estimated system state is then computed as the 
average of all resampled particles. This new estimated state becomes the 
next system input, and the process is repeated iteratively.
The PF algorithm, the inner-outer loops control algorithm and the 
quadcopter dynamics were implemented using the Julia programming 
language in the Visual Code Studio software. Julia offers the advantage 
of combining the flexibility of a dynamic programming language with 
superior data processing performance when compared to other high- 
level languages. The primary goal of this choice is to minimize pro­
cessing 
time, 
enabling 
real-time 
implementation in 
practical 
applications.
The Parrot Bepop 2 drone was selected as the model for algorithm 
implementation. Consequently, it is essential to know the parameters 
which characterize the dynamics of this model, along with its operating 
sampling rate. The sampling frequency, as specified by the quadcopter 
manufacturer, is 5 Hz (Pinto et al., 2020), resulting in a sampling time of 
200 ms. The Eq. (20) and (21) contains the values of parameters which 
describe the Bepop 2′s dynamics. 
f1 =
⎡
⎢⎢⎣
0.8417
0
0
0
0
0.8354
0
0
0
0
3.966
0
0
0
0
9.8524
⎤
⎥⎥⎦
(20) 
f2 =
⎡
⎢⎢⎣
0.18227
0
0
0
0
0.17095
0
0
0
0
4.001
0
0
0
0
4.7295
⎤
⎥⎥⎦
(21) 
The particle vector, represented as an eight-row and single-column 
vector, includes positions in the ground frame and velocities in the 
quadcopter’s body frame as state variables. The main objective of the 
work is to test the performance of the inner-outer loops controller 
working together with the PF. To achieve this goal, the system is tested 
in two different tasks: positioning and trajectory tracking. For the 
positioning task, the objective is that the UAV reaches a specific position 
in space with a defined orientation. The vector chosen for the test, 
representing the desired position in space, with coordinates x, y, z, and 
the desired orientation ψ, is presented in Eq. (22). 
xd =
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
3
5
1
π
2
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
(22) 
In this case, since the desired spatial pose remains constant over 
time, it is not necessary to calculate its derivative to apply it to the 
previously defined control algorithm. For the trajectory tracking test, a 
time-parametrized curve is defined as the target for the robot to follow. 
The selected curve is presented in Eq. (23). 
xd =
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
0.1 + 3.75 • sin(0.4 • t)
−0.2 + 4.6875 • cos(0.2 • t)
1 + 0.5 • sin(0.4 • t)
π
6 • sin(0.4 • t)
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
(23) 
In this case, since the desired pose varies over time, it is also 
necessary to calculate its derivative to apply it to the control law. The 
derivative of the chosen curve is shown in Eq. (24). 
˙xd =
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
1.5 • cos(0.4 • t)
−0.9375 • sin(0.2 • t)
0.2 • cos(0.4 • t)
0.4π
6
• cos(0.4 • t)
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
(24) 
The initial position, orientation, and velocities of the quadcopter are 
set to zero for both tasks. Eq. (25) and (26) provide the matrices for the 
inverse controller, while Eq. (27) defines the variables of the dynamic 
controller, which were previously adjusted independently of the PF. 
L1 =
⎡
⎢⎢⎣
2
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
2
⎤
⎥⎥⎦
(25) 
L2 =
⎡
⎢⎢⎣
2
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
2
⎤
⎥⎥⎦
(26) 
KD =
⎡
⎢⎢⎣
2
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
2
⎤
⎥⎥⎦
(27) 
The positions in the ground reference frame and the velocities in the 
quadcopter’s body reference frame are selected as the state variables for 
the particle vector, represented as an eight-row and single-column 
vector. The initial particle group is generated from a normal probabil­
ity distribution, characterized by a diagonal covariance matrix where all 
diagonal elements are equal to 1. Since the UAV is expected to operate 
effectively even without altitude or orientation sensors, it was assumed 
that the drone can only measure its x and y positions in the ground 
coordinate system during the tests. Thus, the weight of each particle is 
calculated based on the difference between its value and the measured 
values for the x and y variables. The number of particles required for 
optimal performance was determined based on the trade-off between 
algorithm accuracy and processing time. Tests with varying particle 
counts were analyzed to determine optimal filter performance. 
Furthermore, the algorithms were executed 10 times for each test and 
particle count to ensure adequate statistical reliability of the results. The 
selected duration time of the simulation is equal to 40 s. This value was 
selected to ensure that all controlled variables converged to the desired 
values in all tests conducted during the paper.
To evaluate the algorithms’ ability to handle stochastic processes, 
noise is added to the measured variables (x and y), with a magnitude 
comparable to that of the deterministic variables. The total processing 
time for both tasks was recorded using Julia functions to compare 
computational costs. This time was recorded for particle counts of 10, 
100, and 1000. Additionally, a threshold was established to enable a 
comparison of the algorithms in terms of convergence time. The settling 
time in control theory, defined as the time it takes for a system’s 
response to reach and remain within 2 % of its final value, was selected 
V. Biazi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Expert Systems With Applications 296 (2026) 129245 
6

## Page 7

as the convergence parameter (Nise, Norman, 2020). The tests of the 
algorithms were carried out in a personal notebook with a processor 
Intel(R) Core(TM) Ultra 9 185H 2.30 GHz and 64 GB of RAM memory. 
All the simulations are performed offline initially to verify reliability 
before future real-time experimental implementation.
4. Results and discussion
Fig. 3 shows the 3D plot of the drone’s mean trajectory to reach the 
desired point, while Fig. 4 illustrates the evolution of each position and 
orientation variables as a function of time during the positioning task. 
Both the desired and the simulated variable values are shown in the 
graphs. In Fig. 4, the central tendency and variability for all the variables 
are presented, with the shaded region around the mean of the simulated 
values representing the standard deviation. Even for highly noisy sensor 
measurements for variables x and y in the ground reference frame, the 
PF algorithm successfully estimated the system’s state, enabling the 
controller to guide the drone to the desired position. The positioning 
task in Figs. 3 and 4 used a number of particles equal to 10 to the PF 
algorithm.
The mean of the simulated values converges toward the desired 
position over time, even when starting with unknown initial values and 
estimated by the PF throughout the iterations. The small variability of 
the results in relation to the mean in the graphs indicates that the system 
can handle process and measurement noise and have good repeatability. 
It can also be observed that the control algorithm achieves its objective 
by reducing the steady-state error to zero over time. The same simula­
tions were repeated altering only the number of particles to see differ­
ences in terms of variability of results and processing time. Figs. 5 and 6
presents the position and orientation of the drone as a function of time 
during the positioning task for 100 and 1000 particles.
The analysis of Figs. 5 and 6, when compared to Fig. 4, shows that a 
larger number of particles tends to result in lower variability in the 
response at the beginning of the simulation but higher variability in 
intermediate stages compared to a smaller number of particles. This 
occurs because a larger number of particles increases the likelihood of 
selecting particles with extreme values that are farther from the desired 
value and that have lower weights, leading to an increase in the dif­
ference between the desired and the mean value of the state variables. 
For this reason, it can be observed that the convergence time may in­
crease when a larger number of particles is used.
Table 1 presents the mean and standard deviation of the processing 
time of the PF algorithm for the simulations with different number of 
particles done for the positioning task.
The computational cost of the PF is observed to increase with a 
higher number of particles. For this reason, it is essential to manage the 
number of particles used in the PF to maintain a feasible computational 
cost. From Figs. 4 to 6 and Table 1, it can be reasonably concluded that 
increasing the number of particles does not always lead to a significant 
improvement in algorithm performance. Therefore, increasing the 
computational cost without achieving better results is not justified. An 
optimal number of particles should be chosen to strike a balance be­
tween computational cost, variability, and convergence time, based on 
the specific needs of the application.
Table 2 presents the interval of settling time considering the upper 
and lower variability in relation to the mean for the simulations con­
ducted with different numbers of particles in the positioning task.
The higher settling time values and the larger difference between the 
Fig. 3. Average 3D trajectory followed by the UAV during a positioning task 
performed 10 times using 10 particles in the PF estimator.
Fig. 4. Quadcopter simulated and desired state variables: (a) position in the x-axis, (b) position in the y-axis, (c) position in the z-axis and (d) yaw angle evolution as 
function of time during a positioning task using 10 particles in PF estimator.
V. Biazi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Expert Systems With Applications 296 (2026) 129245 
7

## Page 8

maximum and minimum settling times for a larger number of particles 
also result from a higher probability of selecting particles with smaller 
weights. This deviation causes the controlled values to move further 
away from the desired value in later stages of the simulation and delays 
the convergence of the upper and lower bounds.
Fig. 7 shows the 3D plot of the drone’s mean trajectory to reach the 
desired trajectory, while Fig. 8 illustrates the evolution of each position 
and orientation variables as a function of time during the trajectory 
tracking task. Similar to the positioning task, the central tendency and 
variability of all variables are illustrated, with the shaded area sur­
rounding the mean of the simulated values representing the standard 
deviation. Animated GIFs of the desired and drone trajectories as func­
tion of time for 10, 100 and 1000 particles are in the supplementary 
material.
Despite the presence of highly noisy sensor measurements for vari­
ables in the ground reference frame, the PF algorithm with 10 particles 
Fig. 5. Quadcopter simulated and desired state variables: (a) position in the x-axis, (b) position in the y-axis, (c) position in the z-axis and (d) yaw angle evolution as 
function of time during a positioning task using 100 particles in PF estimator.
Fig. 6. Quadcopter simulated and desired state variables: (a) position in the x-axis, (b) position in the y-axis, (c) position in the z-axis and (d) yaw angle evolution as 
function of time during a positioning task using 1000 particles in PF estimator.
Table 1 
Means and standard deviations of the processing times for convergence during a 
positioning task, evaluated with different numbers of particles in the PF 
estimator.
Algorithm
Mean
SD
PF (10 particles)
0.108 s
0.061 s
PF (100 particles)
0.155 s
0.053 s
PF (1000 particles)
0.947 s
0.153 s
V. Biazi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Expert Systems With Applications 296 (2026) 129245 
8

## Page 9

effectively estimated the system’s state, allowing the controller to suc­
cessfully guide the drone along the desired trajectory. Similar to the 
positioning task, the algorithm proved itself able to align the simulated 
values with the trajectory moving values for both particles counts. A 
slight variability in the data can be observed in the measured variables, 
possibly due to the fact that particles closer to the measured values are 
assigned higher weights, which in turn increases their likelihood of 
being selected during the resampling process.
Figs. 9 and 10 present the evolution of each position and orientation 
variables as a function of time during the trajectory tracking task for 100 
particles and 1000 particles, respectively.
It can be observed that the initial variability in the unmeasured 
variables is lower for a larger number of particles compared to a smaller 
number, although the convergence time is longer. The variability of the 
simulated variables relative to the desired variables tends to remain for a 
longer period of time when the number of particles is larger. This 
behaviour is like what was observed in the positioning task and repre­
sents a characteristic of the proposed system. Table 3 presents the mean 
and standard deviation of the processing time of the PF algorithm for the 
simulations with different number of particles done for the trajectory 
tracking task.
For a real-time implementation, it is important to evaluate whether 
the computational processing time is long enough to impair the con­
troller’s behavior. In some cases, the algorithm’s prolonged processing 
time hinders the controller’s ability to provide real-time responses, 
compromising its performance and system stability. Moreover, when a 
rapid external disturbance appears and affects the system’s states, it is 
necessary a fast adaptation of the system and controller to deal with the 
problem without losing control of the system and compromising the 
execution of the task. In applications that require precision positioning, 
such as pipeline inspection and rescue operations, oscillations in the 
controlled variables must be as small as possible when the position of 
interest is reached to avoid any possible damage to the operation. Thus, 
achieving an appropriate balance in particle counting within the pro­
posed system is crucial to ensure its efficiency aligns with the re­
quirements of the intended task.
Despite the promising results demonstrated in this study, certain 
limitations must be acknowledged to provide a comprehensive under­
standing of the proposed approach and its applicability. The PF 
Table 2 
Settling time intervals during a quadcopter’s positioning task, evaluated with 
different numbers of particles in the PF estimator.
Algorithm
Variable
Settling time (s)
PF (10 particles)
X position
1.6 to 2.2
Y position
1.6 to 2.6
Z position
1.8 to 2.4
Ψ angle
2.0 to 2.4
PF (100 particles)
X position
14.8 to 15.2
Y position
1.8 to 5.0
Z position
9.4 to 9.6
Ψ angle
14 to 15
PF (1000 particles)
X position
27.8 to 33.4
Y position
2.0 to 5.8
Z position
26.4 to 35.6
Ψ angle
8.6 to 9.2
Fig. 7. Average 3D trajectory followed by the UAV during a trajectory tracking 
task performed 10 times using 10 particles in the PF estimator.
Fig. 8. Quadcopter simulated and desired state variables: (a) position in the x-axis, (b) position in the y-axis, (c) position in the z-axis and (d) yaw angle evolution as 
function of time during a trajectory tracking task using 10 particles in PF estimator.
V. Biazi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Expert Systems With Applications 296 (2026) 129245 
9

## Page 10

algorithm exhibits higher computational costs as the number of particles 
increases. This can lead to longer processing times and potentially hin­
dering real-time implementation in scenarios that require rapid adap­
tations to external disturbances. Achieving a balance between accuracy 
and computational efficiency, as well as leveraging hardware accelera­
tion techniques, is essential to ensure the system’s feasibility for real- 
world applications. Moreover, the quadcopter’s dynamic model 
simplification, assuming small pitch and roll angles, makes the 
controller efficient for tasks that do not involve aggressive maneuvers or 
high-speed operations, such as fish cage and pipelines inspections. The 
algorithm was tested in two specific tasks: positioning and trajectory 
tracking. Tests on different tasks are needed to assess the broader 
applicability of the proposal.
5. Conclusion
In this work, a state estimation approach based on the PF is proposed 
to operate in conjunction with an inner-outer loops controller, enabling 
Fig. 9. Quadcopter simulated and desired state variables: (a) position in the x-axis, (b) position in the y-axis, (c) position in the z-axis and (d) yaw angle evolution as 
function of time during a trajectory tracking task using 100 particles in PF estimator.
Fig. 10. Quadcopter simulated and desired state variables: (a) position in the x-axis, (b) position in the y-axis, (c) position in the z-axis and (d) yaw angle evolution as 
function of time during a trajectory tracking task using 1000 particles in PF estimator.
Table 3 
Means and standard deviations of the processing times for convergence during a 
quadcopter’s positioning task, evaluated with different numbers of particles in 
the PF estimator.
Algorithm
Mean
SD
PF (10 particles)
0.063 s
0.046 s
PF (100 particles)
0.180 s
0.056 s
PF (1000 particles)
1.110 s
0.108 s
V. Biazi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Expert Systems With Applications 296 (2026) 129245 
10

## Page 11

precise quadcopter position control and trajectory tracking. To evaluate 
the effectiveness of the proposed tool, the algorithm is implemented and 
tested on the two specified tasks. The algorithm was evaluated based on 
several key characteristics, including computational cost, estimation 
variability, and its effectiveness in accurately reaching the point of in­
terest. The PF algorithm proved to be effective in its role as a state 
estimator for both tested tasks. Despite utilizing noisy measurements as 
input, it was able to accurately estimate the system’s state, enabling the 
control algorithm to perform its function efficiently as well.
For the positioning task, the average computational processing time 
was 0.108 s, 0.155 s, and 0.947 s for particle counts of 10, 100, and 
1000, respectively. The standard deviation in processing time across all 
simulations (for 10, 100, and 1000 particles) remained below 0.153 s. 
For the trajectory tracking task, the behaviour was similar with the 
average computational processing time was 0.063 s, 0.180 s, and 1.110 s 
for particle counts of 10, 100, and 1000, respectively and standard de­
viation inferior to 0.108 s. Regarding the settling time during the posi­
tioning task, simulations with 10 particles showed values ranging from 
1.6 s to 2.6 s, those with 100 particles ranged from 1.8 s to 15.2 s, and 
those with 1000 particles ranged from 2.0 s to 35.6 s.
The drone consistently achieved the desired values, as shown by the 
data’s low variability. However, it was observed that increasing the 
number of particles tends to reduce the initial variability of the simu­
lated variables but introduces variability later in the simulation. This 
also results in an extended convergence time for the control algorithm. 
This happens because a greater number of particles heightens the chance 
of selecting those with extreme values, further away from the desired 
target, and associated with lower weights. The best strategy to deal with 
the computational cost limitation of the PF is to select a number of 
particles that gives a good trade-off between accuracy and reliability of 
the results.
Based on the analyses and arguments presented, the PF algorithm 
stands out as a robust and viable solution for estimating the state of a 
quadcopter, particularly in scenarios where sensor performance is 
compromised. In this way, it prevents the loss of the equipment’s posi­
tion and orientation in space during the execution of high-responsibility 
tasks that demand high precision and reliability in spatial positioning. 
Noise in the measured variables, even with magnitudes comparable to 
the state values, did not affect the PF’s performance. This demonstrates 
the algorithm’s ability to effectively manage stochastic processes, 
establishing it as a robust and reliable option for real-time applications.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
This work was developed within the scope of the projects CICECO- 
Aveiro Institute of Materials, UIDB/50011/2020 (DOI 10.54499/ 
UIDB/50011/2020), UIDP/50011/2020 (DOI 10.54499/UIDP/50011/ 
2020) & LA/P/0006/2020 (DOI 10.54499/LA/P/0006/2020) financed 
by national funds through the FCT/MCTES (PIDDAC). The research was 
co-funded by the financial support of the European Union under the 
REFRESH – Research Excellence For Region Sustainability and High- 
tech Industries project number CZ.10.03.01/00/22003/0000048 via 
the Operational Programme Just Transition. This work was also sup­
ported by the Ministry of Education, Youth, and Sports of the Czech 
Republic conducted by the VSB-Technical University of Ostrava, under 
grant no. SP2025/039.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.eswa.2025.129245.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
References
Aasen, H., Burkart, A., Bolten, A., & Bareth, G. (2015). Generating 3D hyperspectral 
information with lightweight UAV snapshot cameras for vegetation monitoring: 
From camera calibration to quality assurance. ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and 
Remote Sensing, 108, 245–259.
Abdelmaksoud, S. I., Mailah, M., & Abdallah, A. M. (2020). Control strategies and novel 
techniques for autonomous rotorcraft unmanned aerial vehicles: A review. IEEE 
Access, 8, 195142–195169.
Abdulbaqi, A. S. et al. Design and Fabrication of Bio-Inspired Robotic Systems for 
Developed Mobility and Functionality in Unstructured Environments. 2023.
Abuthagir Iburahim, S., Ashpel Mano, M. R., Naga Kalpithashree, N., Ananthan, P. S., & 
Arisekar, U. (2025). Drones or Unmanned Aerial Vehicles in Fisheries and 
Aquaculture. In Information Technology in Fisheries and Aquaculture (pp. 279–293). 
Springer Nature Singapore: Singapore. 
Aggarwal, Kriti et al. Deep learning in robotics for strengthening industry 4.0.: 
opportunities, challenges and future directions. Robotics and AI for cybersecurity 
and critical infrastructure in smart cities, p. 1-19, 2022.
Alon, O., Rabinovich, S., Fyodorov, C., & Cauchard, J. R. (2021). September). Drones in 
firefighting: A user-centered design perspective. In In Proceedings of the 23rd 
international conference on mobile human-computer interaction (pp. 1–11).
Asadzadeh, S., de Oliveira, W. J., & de Souza Filho, C. R. (2022). UAV-based remote 
sensing for the petroleum industry and environmental monitoring: State-of-the-art 
and perspectives. Journal of Petroleum Science and Engineering, 208, Article 109633.
Aydin, H., & Temizel, C. (2022, April). Latest Applications of UAVs, Drones and Robotics 
in the Oil and Gas Industry. In Offshore Technology Conference (p. D021S019R007). 
OTC.
Bos, M., Theys, B., Swevers, J., & Pipeleers, G. (2021, November). Modeling and 
Identification of Multirotor Drone Dynamics for Onboard MPC Motion Planning. In 
12th International Micro Air Vehicle Conference (pp. 35-41). The International 
Micro Air Vehicle Conference; Mexico.
Bruun, Edvard PG; Adriaenssens, Sigrid; Parascho, Stefana. Structural rigidity theory 
applied to the scaffold-free (dis) assembly of space frames using cooperative 
robotics. Automation in Construction, v. 141, p. 104405, 2022.
Bushnaq, O. M., Mishra, D., Natalizio, E., & Akyildiz, I. F. (2022). Unmanned aerial 
vehicles (UAVs) for disaster management. In Nanotechnology-Based Smart Remote 
Sensing Networks for Disaster Prevention (pp. 159–188). Elsevier.
C. 328, ICAO Cir 328, Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS). 2016.
Daher, E. (2023, October). Top 8 Digital Safety Trends in Oil and Gas in 2023. In SPE 
Asia Pacific Oil and Gas Conference and Exhibition (p. D021S016R003). SPE.
Deja, M., Siemiątkowski, M. S., Vosniakos, G. C., & Maltezos, G. (2020). Opportunities 
and challenges for exploiting drones in agile manufacturing systems. Procedia 
Manufacturing, 51, 527–534.
Del Moral, P. (1998). Measure-valued processes and interacting particle systems. 
Application to nonlinear filtering problems. Ann. Appl. Probab., 8(2), 438–495.
Delgado, Juan Manuel Davila; Oyedele, Lukumon. Robotics in construction: A critical 
review of the reinforcement learning and imitation learning paradigms. Advanced 
Engineering Informatics, v. 54, p. 101787, 2022.
Emimi, M., Khaleel, M., & Alkrash, A. (2023). The current opportunities and challenges 
in drone technology. Int. J. Electr. Eng. and Sustain., 74–89.
Ishiwatari, M. (2024). Leveraging drones for effective disaster management: A comprehensive 
analysis of the 2024 Noto Peninsula earthquake case in Japan. Progress in Disaster 
Science. 
Jazwinski, A. H. (2007). Stochastic processes and filtering theory. Courier Corporation. 
Julier, S. J., Uhlmann, J. K., & Durrant-Whyte, H. F. (1995, June). A new approach for 
filtering nonlinear systems. In Proceedings of 1995 American Control Conference- 
ACC’95 (Vol. 3, pp. 1628-1632). IEEE.
Julier, S. J., & Uhlmann, J. K. (2004). Unscented filtering and nonlinear estimation. 
Proceedings of the IEEE, 92(3), 401–422.
Khalil, H. K., & Grizzle, J. W. (2002). Nonlinear systems (Vol. 3). Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Prentice Hall. 
Khamseh, H. Bonyan; Ghorbani, S.; Janabi-Sharifi, F. Unscented Kalman filter state 
estimation for manipulating unmanned aerial vehicles. Aerospace Science and 
Technology, v. 92, p. 446-463, 2019.
Kim, S. J., Lim, G. J., Cho, J., & Cˆot´e, M. J. (2017). Drone-aided healthcare services for 
patients with chronic diseases in rural areas. Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems, 
88, 163–180.
Kishore, G., & Saderla, S. (2024, December). Particle Filter-Based State and Parameter 
Estimation for Delta Wing UAV. In TENCON 2024-2024 IEEE Region 10 Conference 
(TENCON) (pp. 289-294). IEEE.
Kurt-Yavuz, Z., & Yavuz, S. (2012, June). A comparison of EKF, UKF, FastSLAM2. 0, and 
UKF-based FastSLAM algorithms. In 2012 IEEE 16th International Conference on 
Intelligent Engineering Systems (INES) (pp. 37-43). IEEE.
Li, W., Sun, S., Jia, Y., & Du, J. (2016). Robust unscented Kalman filter with adaptation of 
process and measurement noise covariances. Digital Signal Processing, 48, 93–103.
Li, W., Wang, Z., Yuan, Y., & Guo, L. (2020). Two-stage particle filtering for non-Gaussian 
state estimation with fading measurements. Automatica, 115, Article 108882.
Liu, J. S., & Liu, J. S. (2001). Monte Carlo strategies in scientific computing (Vol. 10,, 978.
V. Biazi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Expert Systems With Applications 296 (2026) 129245 
11

## Page 12

Mohsan, S. A. H., Khan, M. A., Noor, F., Ullah, I., & Alsharif, M. H. (2022). Towards the 
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs): A comprehensive review. Drones, 6(6), 147.
Navisa, S. C., Cahyadi, M. N., & Asfihani, T. (2023, October). Analysis of GNSS and IMU 
Sensor Data Fusion Using the Unscented Kalman Filter Method on Medical Drones in 
Open Air. In IOP Conference Series: Earth and Environmental Science (Vol. 1250, 
No. 1, p. 012019). IOP Publishing.
Nise, Norman S. Control systems engineering. John Wiley & Sons, 2020.
Nodehi, Shahab E.; Bruzzone, Luca; Fanghella, Pietro. SnakeTrack, A Bio-inspired, Single 
Track Mobile Robot with Compliant Vertebral Column for Surveillance and 
Inspection. In: International Conference on Robotics in Alpe-Adria Danube Region. 
Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2022. p. 513-520.
Pan, Z., Lie, D., Qiang, L., Shaolan, H., Shilai, Y., Yande, L., & Haiyang, P. (2016). Effects 
of citrus tree-shape and spraying height of small unmanned aerial vehicle on droplet 
distribution. International Journal of Agricultural and Biological Engineering, 9(4), 
45–52.
Pang, Hui et al. An enhanced temperature-dependent model and state-of-charge 
estimation for a Li-Ion battery using extended Kalman filter. International Journal of 
Energy Research, v. 44, n. 9, p. 7254-7267, 2020.
Perikleous, D., Koustas, G., Velanas, S., Margariti, K., Velanas, P., & Gonzalez- 
Aguilera, D. (2024). A novel drone design based on a reconfigurable unmanned 
aerial vehicle for wildfire management. Drones, 8(5), 203.
Pinto, A. O., Marciano, H. N., Bacheti, V. P., Moreira, M. S. M., Brand˜ao, A. S., & 
Sarcinelli-Filho, M. (2020, September). High-level modeling and control of the 
bebop 2 micro aerial vehicle. In 2020 International Conference on Unmanned 
Aircraft Systems (ICUAS) (pp. 939-947). IEEE.
Quamar, M. M., Al-Ramadan, B., Khan, K., Shafiullah, M., & El Ferik, S. (2023). 
Advancements and applications of drone-integrated geographic information system 
technology—A review. Remote Sensing, 15(20), 5039.
Romanenko, A., & Castro, J. A. (2004). The unscented filter as an alternative to the EKF 
for nonlinear state estimation: A simulation case study. Computers & chemical 
engineering, 28(3), 347–355.
Santana, L. V., Brand˜ao, A. S., & Sarcinelli-Filho, M. (2016). Navigation and cooperative 
control using the ar. drone quadrotor. Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems, 84, 
327–350.
Santos, M. C. P., Rosales, C. D., Sarapura, J. A., Sarcinelli-Filho, M., & Carelli, R. (2019). 
An adaptive dynamic controller for quadrotor to perform trajectory tracking tasks. 
Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems, 93, 5–16.
SEO, Miran; GUPTA, Samraat; HAM, Youngjib. Evaluation of Work Performance, Task 
Load, and Behavior Changes on Time-Delayed Teleoperation Tasks in Space 
Construction. In: Construction Research Congress 2024. 2024. p. 89-98.
Ubina, N. A., & Cheng, S. C. (2022). A review of unmanned system technologies with its 
application to aquaculture farm monitoring and management. Drones, 6(1), 12.
Xie, W., Wang, L., Bai, B., Peng, B., & Feng, Z. (2019, May). An improved algorithm 
based on particle filter for 3D UAV target tracking. In ICC 2019-2019 IEEE 
International Conference on Communications (ICC) (pp. 1-6). IEEE.
Xu, H., Li, P., Wen, L., & Wang, Z. (2021). Vision/inertial integrated navigation method 
for quadcopter based on EKF state observer. In Journal of physics: Conference series 
(Vol. 1748, No. 6, p. 062076). IOP Publishing.
Xue, X., Lan, Y., Sun, Z., Chang, C., & Hoffmann, W. C. (2016). Develop an unmanned 
aerial vehicle based automatic aerial spraying system. Computers and electronics in 
agriculture, 128, 58–66.
Zhang, S., Guo, X., & Zhang, X. (2020). An improved adaptive unscented kalman filtering 
for state of charge online estimation of lithium-ion battery. Journal of energy storage, 
32, Article 101980.
Zhu, F., Lu, Y. Y., & Yang, J. (2024). July). Collaborative Control Technology and 
Prospects of Drone Swarms in Earthquake Emergency Rescue Scenarios. In In 
Proceedings of the 2024 Asia Pacific Conference on Computing Technologies, 
Communications and Networking (pp. 83–91).
V. Biazi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Expert Systems With Applications 296 (2026) 129245 
12
