# drones-09-00067-v2.pdf

## Page 1

Academic Editor: Mostafa
Hassanalian
Received: 8 December 2024
Revised: 11 January 2025
Accepted: 14 January 2025
Published: 17 January 2025
Citation: Huang, T.; Liu, K.; Yang, Y.;
Wen, C.-Y.; Huang, X. Disturbance-
Observer-Based Fixed-Time
Backstepping Control for Quadrotors
with Input Saturation and Actuator
Failure. Drones 2025, 9, 67.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
drones9010067
Copyright: © 2025 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license
(https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/).
Article
Disturbance-Observer-Based Fixed-Time Backstepping Control
for Quadrotors with Input Saturation and Actuator Failure
Tao Huang 1,2
, Kang Liu 2
, Yefeng Yang 1,2,*, Chih-Yung Wen 2
and Xianlin Huang 1
1
Center for Control Theory and Guidance Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin 150001, China;
18b904060@stu.hit.edu.cn (T.H.)
2
Department of Aeronautical and Aviation Engineering, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University,
Hong Kong 100872, China
*
Correspondence: 18b904013@stu.hit.edu.cn
Abstract: This paper investigates the fixed-time tracking control problem of an unmanned
aerial vehicle (UAV) considering the disturbance, input saturation, and actuator failure.
According to the hierarchical control principle, the UAV dynamics are decomposed into a
translational and rotational loop to accommodate the controller design. A novel nonsingular
fixed-time backstepping controller based on switching variables is proposed to achieve fast
convergence of system tracking errors within a fixed time. To overcome the effect of the
disturbance and the actuator failure, two fixed-time disturbance observers are designed in
two loops, respectively. By integrating the fixed-time auxiliary variables into the dynamic
controllers, the problem of input saturation can be addressed. In addition, the tracking
errors of the closed-loop system converge to the neighborhood of the origin in a fixed time.
Finally, sufficient simulation results verify the validity of the proposed control framework
for the UAV.
Keywords: fixed-time backstepping control; input saturation; disturbance observer; actuator
failure; quadrotor unmanned aerial vehicle
1. Introduction
In recent years, unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) have garnered significant attention
across both military and civilian sectors. These versatile devices offer innovative solutions
to a variety of applications, including aerial photography, firefighting, search and rescue
operations, transportation, even aerial refueling, etc. [1–3]. Among the diverse range of
UAVs, quadcopter UAVs (QUAVs) have emerged as the most popular choice due to their
simplicity and convenience in executing complex tasks. As quadcopters become increas-
ingly integrated into industrial production and daily life, there is a growing demand for
enhanced control performance, such as effectively mitigating disturbances and managing
actuator failures.
Several classic control strategies have been extensively explored for QUAVs, including
proportional–integral–derivative (PID) control [4] and linear quadratic regulator (LQR)
control [5]. The sliding mode control (SMC) method, known for its ease of implementation,
strong robustness, and fast response, has been applied to control UAVs in the presence of
external disturbances [6]. Nonsingular fast terminal SMC has been proposed to achieve
finite-time tracking and enhance system robustness [7,8], while a cleverly designed finite-
time robust controller was introduced for uncertain time-delay systems [9].
The backstepping algorithm is one of the most popular and effective nonlinear con-
trol methods in strict feedback systems and has been successively applied to the QUAVs
Drones 2025, 9, 67
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones9010067

## Page 2

Drones 2025, 9, 67
2 of 25
in [10,11]. However, traditional backstepping control suffers from the “complexity ex-
plosion” problem because the repeated differentiation of virtual control laws leads to a
dramatic increase in the complexity of the controller. To address this issue, command-
filtered backstepping [12] and dynamic surface control (DSC) [13] have been proposed.
To enhance the robustness of UAV control, an adaptive backstepping controller has been
adopted to effectively suppress disturbances [14,15], and a disturbance observer has been in-
troduced to mitigate external disturbances [16]. To address actuator errors, Wang et al. [17]
employed an extended state observer, achieving fault-tolerant control and enabling robust
trajectory tracking of UAVs within a finite time frame.
Despite these advancements, the aforementioned methods can only ensure the finite-
time stability of the filter errors, meaning the convergence time is theoretically dependent
on initial conditions. To eliminate this dependency, the concept of fixed-time control
was recently introduced [18]. Unlike finite-time stability, fixed-time control ensures that
convergence time is bounded by a constant, regardless of initial conditions, making it an
attractive feature for controller design. Studies have developed a modified nonsingular
terminal sliding mode surface to achieve fixed-time control for second-order nonlinear
systems and multi-agent systems [19]. Using a similar approach, fixed-time position
control for UAVs is accomplished by analyzing each channel in [20]. To achieve fixed-
time disturbance suppression, the design of a fixed-time disturbance observer (FTDO)
for linear systems under measurement noise is discussed in [21]. In [22], a fixed-time
differentiator was developed to ensure the tracking performance of hypersonic vehicles.
In [23], a nonlinear FTDO was studied to estimate target acceleration.
However, research on fixed-time disturbance rejection and motion control of UAV
tracking remains insufficient. The introduction of fixed-time controllers can easily lead to
severe chattering in the system, which is unacceptable in practical applications. Addition-
ally, in fixed-time backstepping control, the derivative of the virtual control can exhibit
singularities, potentially causing controller failure or even system divergence. Further-
more, the aforementioned studies on fixed-time control do not take into account the input
saturation characteristics of the system, a common and critical factor in the actual control
of UAVs.
To address the aforementioned issues, this paper proposes a novel nonsingular fixed-
time backstepping (NFTBS) control framework based on a fixed-time disturbance observer
for QUAV trajectory tracking in the presence of input saturation and actuator failure.
Compared with the previous works, the designed control algorithm provides the following
attractive contributions:
(1)
Unlike some traditional backstepping controllers proposed in [14–16], a fixed-time
disturbance-observer-based NFTBS (FTDOB-NFTBS) control framework is developed,
which combines the FTDO and the auxiliary variable to eliminate the adverse effects
of the external disturbance, actuator failure, and input saturation. The fixed-time
stability of the closed-loop system can be guaranteed.
(2)
In contrast to previous results proposed in [24,25], the proposed NFTBS not only stabi-
lizes the system within a fixed time but also guarantees a rapid optimal convergence
rate both at a distance from and in close proximity to the reference trajectories.
(3)
Unlike some earlier proposed fixed-time backstepping controllers shown in [25,26],
the design of continuous control input signals, along with the implementation of a
fixed-time tracking differentiator (TD), effectively addresses the issues of singularity,
chattering, and differential explosion that are commonly encountered in fixed-time
backstepping control.
The remaining sections of this article are structured as follows: Section 2 presents
preliminaries and problem formation. Section 3 details the controller design and provides

## Page 3

Drones 2025, 9, 67
3 of 25
the stability analysis. Simulation results and discussions are arranged in Section 4. Finally,
Section 5 gives conclusive statements.
Notations: In this article, diag(·) denotes the diagonal matrix. ◦represents the
Hadamard product operator. C(·), S(·), and T(·) correspond to sin(·), cos(·), and tan(·). | · |
and ∥· ∥indicate the 1-norm and 2-norm of a vector or variable, respectively. sign(·) is the
signum function. ⌊·⌉α = | · |α ◦sign(·).
2. Preliminaries and Problem Formulation
2.1. System Modeling and Preliminaries
The UAV model is depicted in Figure 1, which includes a rigid cross frame and four
rotors. For ease of describing the coordination configuration, the body-fixed frame is repre-
sented by SB = {OBXBYBZB}, and the inertia frame is represented by SO{= OEXEYEZE}.
(a) Construction of the UAV
(b) Frame of the UAV
Figure 1. Construction and frame of the UAV.
Referring to reference [27], the dynamic model of the UAV can be described as
¨η = A(ρ)
Eηsat(u f )
m
−kt
m ˙η −g + dη
m ,
J ˙ω = −krω −ω × (Jω) + dρ + Eρsat(τ),
˙ρ = W(ρ)ω,
(1)
where η = [x, y, z]⊤, kt ∈R, u f ∈R, and m, respectively, represent the position, drag
coefficient of the translational loop, desired thrustm and mass of the UAV. g = [0, 0, g]⊤is
the gravity vector. ρ = [ϕ, θ, ψ]⊤with ϕ, θ, ψ, respectively, being the roll, pitch, and yaw
angles in SO. ω = [p, q, r]⊤is the angular velocity along three axes in SB. x, y, z, and ψ are
the outputs of the system that need to be controlled. J ∈R3×3, kr ∈R and τ = [τ1, τ2, τ3]⊤,
respectively, denote the inertia tensor matrix, the drag coefficient of the rotational loop,
and the desired torque of the UAV. dη = [dx, dy, dz]⊤and dρ = [dp, dq, dr]⊤denote the
disturbances; sat(u f ) and sat(τ) = [sat(τ1), sat(τ2), sat(τ3)]⊤, respectively, denote the
nonlinear saturation characteristics of u f and τ. As described in [28],
sat(u f ) = sign(u f ) min{|u f |, u f },
sat(τi) = sign(τi) min{|τi|, τi},
where i = 1, 2, 3, u f and τi are the upper bounds of the actuators.
Eη and Eρ =
diag(E1, E2, E3) denote actuator failure indicators for u f and τ. For j = 1, 2, 3, η, Ej = 1
means that the actuator works normally, and Ej ∈(0, 1) indicates that the j-th actuator

## Page 4

Drones 2025, 9, 67
4 of 25
has partially lost effectiveness but still works. A(ρ) =


CϕCψSθ + SϕSψ
CϕSψSθ −SϕCψ
CθCϕ

is the rotation
vector, and W ≜W(ρ) =


1
SϕTθ
CϕTθ
0
Cϕ
−Sϕ
0
Sϕ/Cθ
Cϕ/Cθ

is the rotation matrix. Additionally, let
Aη ≜A(ρ)/m.
System (1) can be decoupled into two subsystems, namely the translational subsystem
and the rotational subsystem. Considering the underactuated characteristics of the UAV,
a virtual control input uη = [ax, ay, az]⊤is designed to implement the presented controller.
By [11], the desired thrust u f and desired roll and pitch angles (ϕd, θd) can be calculated as
u f = m
q
a2x + a2y + (az + g)2,
(2a)
ϕd = arcsin
m(axSψ −ayCψ)
u f

,
(2b)
θd = arctan
 axCψ + aySψ
az + g

.
(2c)
Taking the saturation characteristics of u f into account, for u f ̸= 0, the virtual control
uη = [ax, ay, az]⊤can be designed as
ax =
sat(u f )
u f
ax, ay =
sat(u f )
u f
ay, az =
sat(u f )
u f
az +
sat(u f ) −u f
u f
g.
(3)
It is easy to verify that
m
q
a2
x + a2
y + (az + g)2 = m
sat(u f )
u f
q
a2x + a2y + (az + g)2 = sat(u f ).
(4)
If u f = 0, saturation does not exist, and there is uη = uη. Through the above design,
the saturation characteristic of u f is assigned to the virtual control uη to facilitate the
controller design of the translational subsystem. In addition, according to (2b), (2c), (3), it is
obvious that the calculation of the desired signal (ϕd, θd) is not affected by the saturation
characteristics of u f .
The tracking error dynamics of the translational subsystem are given by
eη = η −ηd,
˙eη = ˙η −˙ηd,
¨eη = AηEηsat(u f ) −g −kt
m ˙η + dη
m −¨ηd
(5)
= uη −g −kt
m ˙η + dη
m + AηEηsat(u f ) −uη −¨ηd
where eη = [eη1, eη2, eη3]⊤is the position tracking error, and ηd = [xd, yd, zd]⊤is the
reference trajectory. Further, by (1), the tracking error dynamics of the rotational subsystem
are given by
eρ = ρ −ρd, ˙eρ = Wω −˙ρd, ¨eρ = ˙Wω + W ˙ω −¨ρd,
(6)

## Page 5

Drones 2025, 9, 67
5 of 25
where ˙W =


0
˙ϕTθCϕ +
˙θSϕ
C2
θ
−˙ϕSϕTθ +
˙θCϕ
C2
θ
0
−˙ϕSϕ
−˙ϕCϕ
0
˙ϕCϕCθ + ˙θSϕSθ
C2
θ
−˙ϕSϕCθ + ˙θCϕSθ
C2
θ

, and ρd = [ϕd, θd, ψd]⊤is the reference
attitude angle. By defining fρ = −J−1[krω + ω × (Jω)], Aρ = ˙Wω + W fρ, Bρ = W J−1,
the ¨eρ in Equation (6) can be simplified as
¨eρ = Aρ + BρEρsat(τ) + J−1dρ −¨ρd
= Aρ + Bρsat(τ) −Bρ(I3×3 −Eρ)sat(τ) + J−1dρ −¨ρd.
(7)
Remark 1. Note that Aη ∈R3×1 is a vector, and u f ∈R is a 1-dim number. We cannot design a
controller directly by solving the pseudo-inverse of Aη, which may not exist. To solve this problem,
the virtual controller uη ∈R3 is designed. The true input u f is calculated by ∥uη∥, and the
saturation characteristic is assigned to the virtual control as (3).
2.2. Control Objective
Control Objective: Given the UAV system (1), the reference trajectory ηd, and the
reference yaw angle ψd, design a type of fixed-time backstepping controller such that
lim
t→Tη ∥η −ηd∥≤εη, lim
t→Tρ |ψ −ψd| ≤ερ,
where Tη and Tρ are the settling times, and εη > 0 and ερ > 0 are positive constants.
3. Main Result
Before further derivations, some standard assumptions, definitions, and lemmas are
given as follows:
Assumption 1. The equivalent disturbances dη and dρ are all bounded by some known positive
constants, namely ∥dη∥≤dη and ∥dρ∥≤dρ with dη, dρ > 0. The yaw angle is bounded as
−π ≤ψ ≤π. To avoid singularities, the roll and pitch angles are bounded as −π
2 < ϕ, θ < π
2 .
Assumption 2 ([29]). For system (1) with input saturation, there exists an admissible control
policy u ∈Ωu(X), with Ωu(X) being a compact set and X = [e⊤
η , e⊤
ρ ]⊤that can stabilize the
system (1) in a fixed time.
Assumption 3. The parameters m, J, g, kt, and kr of system (1) are known as constants. What is
more, the system states η, ˙η, ρ, and ˙ρ can be accurately measured without delay or noise.
Assumption 4. The accelerations of the reference trajectory are bounded, i.e.,
∥¨ηd∥≤Dηd
| ¨ψd| ≤Dψd,
where Dηd and Dψd are positive constants.
Remark 2. Assumption 3 is a widely accepted and reasonable premise in UAV control [28,30].
The parameters m and J can be directly and easily measured. Additionally, the values for kr and
kt are readily available on multi-rotor drone design websites. Furthermore, due to the negligible
magnitude of kr and kt, any inaccuracies in these parameters are unlikely to significantly affect
system performance.

## Page 6

Drones 2025, 9, 67
6 of 25
Given the limitations on the input of UAVs, the system’s acceleration cannot be infinitely
large. Consequently, it is reasonable to assume, as stated in Assumption 4, that the acceleration of
the reference trajectory is bounded. This assumption ensures the existence of an effective control law
for achieving accurate trajectory tracking within the system.
Definition 1 ([18]). Consider the system
˙x = f (x), f (0) = 0, x(0) = 0, x ∈Rn.
(8)
The trajectory of system (8) is finite-time stable, if there exists a finite convergence time Ts(x0)
for all t ≥Ts, satisfying x(t) = 0.
Definition 2 ([18]). The trajectory of system (8) is fixed-time stable if the system (8) is finite-time
stable and the upper bound of the convergence time Ts does not depend on x0.
Definition 3 ([18,24,31]). The trajectory of system (8) is practically fixed-time stable if there
exists an x0-independent settling function Ts and a positive constant R0 such that for all t ≥Ts,
∥x(t)∥≤R0 holds.
Lemma 1 ([24,32]). The trajectory of the system is practically fixed-time stable for any scalar
0 < µ < ∞, if there exists a Lyapunov function such that
˙V ≤−(αVp + βVq)k + µ, ∀t ≥0,
(9)
where α, β, p, q, and k ∈R+, pk < 1 and qk > 1, the convergence time tr is bounded by
tr ≤T =
1
αkεk(1 −pk) +
1
βkεk(qk −1),
where ε ∈(0, 1), and the residual set is given by

lim
t→tr x
V(x) ≤min

α−1
p

µ
1 −εk
 1
pk
, β−1
q

µ
1 −εk
 1
pk 
.
(10)
Lemma 2 ([33]). For ∀µ ∈R, m ∈R+, κ = 0.2785, there is
0 ≤|µ| −µ tanh(mµ) ≤
1
mκ .
Lemma 3 ([34]). For ∀vi ∈R, i = 1, · · ·, n, there is
 
n
∑
i=1
|vi|
!m
≤
n
∑
i=1
|vi|m, 0 < m ≤1,
n1−k
 
n
∑
i=1
|vi|
!k
≤
n
∑
i=1
|vi|k, k > 1.
3.1. Translational Subsystem Stability
The total disturbance including unknown disturbances and actuator failure in the
translational subsystem can be defined as ∆η = dη
m + AηEηsat(u f ) −uη. To estimate ∆η,
an FTDO is designed as

## Page 7

Drones 2025, 9, 67
7 of 25
˙zη1 = fal1( ˜η) + zη2,
˙zη2 = fal2( ˜η) + uη −g −kt
m ˙η,
˙zη3 = 1
tη
[fal3( ˜η) −zη3],
(11)
where ˜η = η −zη1, and
fal1( ˜η) = λη1 ◦(⌊˜η⌉
1
2 + ⌊˜η⌉
3
2 ),
fal2( ˜η) = λη2 ◦(1
2sign( ˜η) + 2⌊˜η⌉+ 3
2⌊˜η⌉2),
fal3( ˜η) = λη3 ◦sign( ˜η).
(12)
In Equation (12), zη1, zη2, and zη3, respectively, represent the estimation of η, ˙η, and ∆η.
ληi = [ληi1, ληi2, ληi3]⊤, i = 1, 2, 3, are positive vectors. tη > 0 is a small time constant.
By [35], the following lemma holds.
Lemma 4. The estimation errors of ∆η and ˙η, respectively, denoted by ˜∆η = ∆η −zη3 and
˜˙η = ˙η −zη2, converge to small neighborhoods of the origin Ω∆η and Ωη in a fixed-time Tη1 if λη1j
and λη2j, j = 1, 2, 3 are chosen from set
Ωλ =
(
(λη1j, λη2j) ∈R2|0 < λη1j≤2
q
Dη, λη2j >
λ2
η1j
8
+ Dη
2
λ2
η1j
, j = 1, 2, 3
)
∪

(λη1j, λη2j) ∈R2|0 < λη1j≤2
q
Dη, λη2j > Dη, j = 1, 2, 3

,
where Dη is the upper bound of ∆η, i.e., there exists a time t that ∥˜∆η∥≤δη for all t > Tη1, δη is a
positive constant.
To achieve fixed-time stable tracking of the translational loop, the backstepping control
approach is presented as follows:
Step 1: Define the virtual control law αη for the tracking error eη. Choosing the
Lyapunov function candidate for eη as V1 = 1
2e⊤
η eη and differentiating V1 yields
˙V1 = e⊤
η ( ˙η −˙ηd) = e⊤
η αη −e⊤
η ˙ηd + e⊤
η e2η,
(13)
where αη ∈R3 is the virtual control law that needs to be designed and e2η = ˙η −αη.
The virtual control law αη can be selected as
αη = ˙ηd −kη11 ◦tanh(mη1 ◦eη) −kη12 ◦hη1(eη)
(14)
where kη1j = [kη1j1, kη1j2, kη1j3]⊤∈R3, j = 1, 2 and mη1 = [mη11, mη12, mη13]⊤∈R3
are positive constant vectors, and hη1(eη) = [hη(eη1), hη(eη2), hη(eη3)]⊤with hη(eηi) =

eηi
1+pη+pηsign(|eηi|−1), i = 1, 2, 3, 0 < pη < 1 is a positive rational number.
To avoid the differential explosion problem caused by the derivative of αη, the follow-
ing fixed-time TD is designed to estimate its differentiation [35,36]:
˜αη = αη −ˆαη,
ση = ˆ˙αη = ση2 + rη1(

˜αη
 1
2 + µη

˜αη
 3
2 ),
˙ση2 = rη2(sign(˜αη) + 2µη ˜αη + 3
2µ2
η

˜αη
2),
(15)

## Page 8

Drones 2025, 9, 67
8 of 25
where rη1 > 0, rη2 > 0, µη > 0 are the parameters of the TD. According to [35,36], there
exists a fixed-time Tη2 such that ˜αη(t) = ˜ση(t) = 0 for all t > Tη2 with ˜ση = ˙αη −ˆ˙αη.
Step 2: To design the control law u f , the new dynamic error e2η = [e2η1, e2η2, e2η3]⊤∈
R3 is defined as
e2η = ˙η −αη
˙e2η = uη −g −kt
m ˙η + ∆η −˙αη.
(16)
Design the control law as
uη = −eη + g + kt
m ˙η −zη3 + ση −(kη21 + ξη1) ◦tanh(mη2 ◦e2η) −kη22 ◦hη2(e2η) + ξη2,
(17)
where ξη2 ∈R3 is the auxiliary variable, defined as follows:
˙ξη2 =









fξη −∥e2η∥2+∥∆uη∥2
∥ξη2∥2
ξη2 −∆uη,
∥ξη2∥≥δ, or
0 < ∥ξη2∥< δ and ∥∆uη∦= 0,
fξη,
∥ξη2∥< δ and ∥∆uη∥= 0,
(18)
where ∆uη = uη −uη, fξη = −ξη2 −kη31 ◦sign(ξη2) −kη32 ◦hξ(ξη2). kη31 and kη32
are positive constant vectors. hη2(e2η) = [hη(e2η1), hη(e2η2), hη(e2η3)]⊤, and hη(e2ηi) =

e2ηi
1+pη+pηsign(|e2ηi|−1),
and hξ(ξη2)
=
[hξ(ξη21), hξ(ξη2), hξ(ξη2)]⊤,
hξ(ξη2i)
=

ξη2i
1+pη+pηsign(|ξη2i|−1), i = 1, 2, 3.
Theorem 1. With FTDO (11), fixed-time TD (15), virtual control law (17), and saturation
auxiliary variable (18) satisfying ξη1 min > δη + δ, the trajectory of the translational subsystem (5)
is guaranteed to be practically fixed-time stable.
The proof is shown in Appendix A.
3.2. Rotational Subsystem Stability
The disturbance acted on the rotational subsystem can be defined as ∆ρ = −Bρ(I3×3 −
Eρ)sat(τ) + J−1dρ. Similarly, the following FTDO is designed to estimate ∆ρ
˙zρ1 = falρ1( ˜ρ) + zρ2,
˙zρ2 = falρ2( ˜ρ) + Aρ + Bρsat(τ),
˙zρ3 = 1
tρ
[falρ3( ˜ρ) −zρ3],
(19)
where ˜ρ = ρ −zρ1 and
falρ1( ˜ρ) = −λρ1 ◦(⌊˜ρ⌉
1
2 + ⌊˜ρ⌉
3
2 ),
falρ2( ˜ρ) = −λρ2 ◦(1
2sign( ˜ρ) + 2⌊˜ρ⌉+ 3
2⌊˜ρ⌉2),
falρ3( ˜ρ) = λρ3 ◦sign( ˜ρ).
(20)
In Equation (20), zρ1, zρ2, and zρ3, respectively, represent the estimation of ρ, ˙ρ, and ∆ρ.
λρi = [λρi1, λρi2, λρi3]⊤, i = 1, 2, are positive vectors. tρ > 0 is a small time constant.
Similarly to Lemma 4, the following lemma holds.

## Page 9

Drones 2025, 9, 67
9 of 25
Lemma 5. The estimation errors of ∆ρ and ˙ρ, respectively denoted by ˜∆ρ = ∆ρ −zρ3 and
˜zρ2 = ˙ρ −zρ2, converge to small neighborhoods of the origin, say, Ω∆ρ and Ωρ, in a fixed-time Tρ1
if λρ1j and λρ2j are selected from set
Ωλ =
(
(λρ1j, λρ2j) ∈R2|0 < λρ1j≤2
q
Dρ, λρ2j >
λ2
ρ1j
8
+ Dρ
2
λ2
ρ1j
, j = 1, 2, 3
)
∪

(λρ1j, λρ2j) ∈R2|0 < λρ1j≤2
q
Dρ, λρ2j > Dρ, j = 1, 2, 3

,
where Dρ is the upper bound of ∆ρ, i.e., there exists a time t that ∥˜∆ρ∥≤δρ for all t > Tρ1, with
δρ being a known small positive constant.
To achieve fixed-time stable tracking of the rotational loop, the backstepping control
approach is presented as follows:
Step 1: To design the virtual control law αρ for the tracking error eρ, the Lyapunov
function candidate V4 = 1
2e⊤
ρ eρ is selected for eρ. The derivative of V4 is given by
˙V4 = e⊤
ρ ˙eρ = e⊤
ρ αρ −e⊤
ρ ˙ρd + e⊤
ρ e2ρ,
(21)
where αρ ∈R3 is the virtual control law that needs to be designed and e2ρ = ˙eρ −αρ.
The virtual control law αρ can be selected as
αρ = ˙ρd −kρ11 ◦tanh(mρ1 ◦eρ) −kρ12 ◦hρ1(eρ)
(22)
where kρ1j = [kρ1j1, kρ1j2, kρ1j3]⊤∈R3, j = 1, 2, mρ1 = [mρ11, mρ12, mρ13]⊤∈R3 are pos-
itive constant vectors, and pρ are the positive real numbers. hρ1(eρ) = [hρ(eρ1), hρ(eρ2),
hρ(eρ3)]⊤, where hρ(eρi) =

eρi
1+pρ+pρsign(|eρi|−1), i = 1, 2, 3, and pρ is a positive ratio-
nal number.
To avoid the differential explosion problem caused by the derivative of αρ, similar to
(15), the TD is designed to estimate its differentiation, which can be given by
˜αρ = αρ −ˆαρ
σρ = ˆ˙αρ = σρ2 + rρ1(

˜αρ
 1
2 + µρ

˜αρ
 3
2 )
˙σρ2 = rρ2(sign(˜αρ) + 2µρ˜αρ + 3
2µ2
ρ

˜αρ
2)
(23)
where rρ1 > 0, rρ2 > 0, µρ > 0 are the parameters of the TD. According to [35,36], there
exists a fixed-time Tρ2 such that ˜αρ(t) = ˜σρ(t) = 0 for all t > Tρ2, ˜σρ = ˙αρ −ˆ˙αρ.
Step 2: To design the control law τ, the dynamics of e2ρ = [e2ρ1, e2ρ2, e2ρ3]⊤∈R3 are
defined as
e2ρ = ˙eρ −αρ, ˙e2ρ = Aρ + Bρsat(τ) + ∆ρ −˙αρ.
(24)
Design the control law as
τ = B−1
ρ [−eρ −Aρ −zρ3 + σρ −(kρ21 + ξρ1) ◦tanh(mρ2 ◦e2ρ) −kρ22 ◦hρ2(e2ρ) + ξρ2],
(25)
where ξρ2 ∈R3 is the auxiliary variable, defined as follows:
˙ξρ2 =









fξρ −∥e2ρ∥2+∥∆τ∥2
∥ξρ2∥2
ξρ2 −∆τ,
∥ξρ2∥≥δ, or
0 < ∥ξρ2∥< δ and ∥∆τ∦= 0,
fξρ,
∥ξρ2∥< δ and ∥∆τ∥= 0,
(26)

## Page 10

Drones 2025, 9, 67
10 of 25
where ∆τ = Bρsat(τ) −Bρτ, fξρ = −ξρ2 −kρ31 ◦sign(ξρ2) −kρ32 ◦hξ(ξρ2).
kρ31
and kρ32 are positive constant vectors.
hρ2(e2ρ) = [hρ(e2ρ1), hρ(e2ρ2), hρ(e2ρ3)], with
hρ(e2ρi) =

e2ρi
1+pρ+pρsign(|e2ρi|−1). hξ(ξρ2) = [hξ(ξρ21), hξ(ξρ2), hξ(ξρ2)]⊤with hξ(ξρ2i) =

ξρ2i
1+pρ+pρsign(|ρ2i|−1), i = 1, 2, 3.
Theorem 2. With FTDO (19), fixed-time TD (23), control law (25), and saturation auxiliary
variable (26), by selecting ξρ1 min > δρ + δ, the rotational subsystem (7) is guaranteed to be
practically fixed-time stable.
Similarly, choosing the Lyapunov function candidate as V5 = 1
2e⊤
ρ eρ + 1
2e⊤
2ρe2ρ. The fol-
lowing inequality holds for ˙V5:
˙V5 ≤−
3
∑
i=1
kρ11i|eρi| −
3
∑
i=1
kρ12i|eρi|2+pρ+pρsign(|eρi|−1)
−
3
∑
i=1
kρ21i|e2ρi| −
3
∑
i=1
kρ22i|e2ρi|2+pρ+pρsign(|e2ρi|−1)
−
3
∑
i=1
ξρ1i|e2ρi|
+ 1
κ
3
∑
i=1
kiρ + e⊤
2ρ ˜∆ρ + e⊤
2ρ ˜σρ + e⊤
2ρ∆τ + e⊤
2ρξρ2,
(27)
where kiρ =
kρ11i
mρ11 +
kρ21i+ξρ1i
mρ21
. Then, choose another Lyapunov function candidate as V6 =
V5 + 1
2ξ⊤
ρ2ξρ2. The derivative of V6 with respect to time can be given by
˙V6 ≤−
3
∑
i=1
kρ11i|eρi| −
3
∑
i=1
kρ12i|eρi|2+pρ+pρsign(|eρi|−1)
−
3
∑
i=1
kρ21i|e2ρi| −
3
∑
i=1
kρ22i|e2ρi|2+pρ+pρsign(|e2ρi|−1)
−
3
∑
i=1
ξρ1i|e2ρi|
+ 1
κ
3
∑
i=1
kiρ + e⊤
2ρ ˜∆ρ + e⊤
2ρ ˜σρ + e⊤
2ρ∆τ + e⊤
2ρξρ2 + ξ⊤
ρ2 ˙ξρ2.
(28)
According to Lemma 5, if t > max(Tρ1, Tρ2), there are ∥˜∆ρ∥≤δρ and ∥˜σρ∥= 0.
Therefore, as analyzed in (A5) and (A7), by selecting ξρ1 min > δρ + δ, the following
inequality holds:
˙V6 ≤−
3
∑
i=1
kρ11i|eρi| −
3
∑
i=1
kρ12i|eρi|2+pρ+pρsign(|eρi|−1)
−
3
∑
i=1
kρ21i|e2ρi| −
3
∑
i=1
kρ22i|e2ρi|2+pρ+pρsign(|e2ρi|−1)
−
3
∑
i=1
kρ31i|ξρ2i| −
3
∑
i=1
kρ32i|ξρ2i|2+pρ+pρsign(|ξρ2i|−1) + 1
κ
3
∑
i=1
kiρ.
Similarly to Theorem 1, the following inequality holds:
˙V6 ≤−
√
2kρ1 minV
1
2
6 −2kρ2 minV
1+pρ
6
+ µρ,

## Page 11

Drones 2025, 9, 67
11 of 25
where kρi min = min(kρ1i min, kρ2i min, kρ3i min), kρji min = min(kρji1, kρji2, kρji3), i = 1, 2, j =
1, 2, 3, and µρ = κ ∑3
i=1 kiρ > 0 is a positive constant. According to Lemma 1, by selecting
k = 1, α =
√
2kρ1 min, β = 2kρ2 min, p = 1
2, and q = 1 + pρ, the trajectory of the rotational
subsystem is practically fixed-time stable and the settling time is bounded by
Tρ < max(Tρ1, Tρ2) + Tρ3
where
Tρ3 <
√
2
kρ1 minε +
1
2pρkρ2 minε.
(29)
Remark 3. Note that tanh(·) is continuous and derivative. Compared with ⌊·⌉γ, 0 < γ < 1,
the utilization of tanh(·) and Lemma 2 can avoid the singularity in the differentiation of virtual
controllers αη and αρ while ensuring the fixed-time stability of the system.
The logic block diagram based on the proposed NFTBS control system is shown in
Figure 2.
Figure 2. The flowchart of QUAV control based on NFTBS.
4. Simulation Results
For the mathematical model of the QUAV, m = 0.8, kt = 0.00075 and kr = 0.0005,
J = 10−3 × diag[3.5, 3.5, 7.0], and u f max = 30 and τmax = [15, 15, 15]⊤. In the simulation
environment described in this article, the system state is updated using the fourth-order
Runge–Kutta method to ensure the accuracy of the system model. Updates to trajectory
states related to controllers, such as observers, differentiators, and controllers, are per-
formed using the Euler method. The entire system operates with a sampling frequency of
200 Hz.
For the proposed NFTBS in the translational loop, increasing kηij (where i = 1, 2 and
j = 1, 2) enhances the convergence speed of the systematic error trajectories and reduces
Tη. Similar to the proportional–derivative (PD) controller, increasing kη2j improves the
system’s damping and reduces the overshoot of the system trajectory. Consequently, kη2j is
set to be greater than kη1j. Additionally, increasing kηi2 and mηi1 can reduce the system’s
tracking error; however, excessively large values may cause significant chattering in the
system state. The parameter selection principle for the rotational loop is similar to that of
the translational loop. Moreover, to ensure the stability of the entire system, the rotational

## Page 12

Drones 2025, 9, 67
12 of 25
loop must converge more quickly than the translational loop. Therefore, it is crucial to set
the gain of the rotational loop higher than that of the translational loop.
4.1. Robustness Verification for Different Parameters
In this subsection, the robustness of NFTBS controllers with different parameters is
discussed under multiple disturbances.
According to the theoretical analysis described above, increasing ξη1 and ξρ1 can
improve the robustness of the system. Without the FTDO, four different sets of ξη1 are
chosen as [2.0, 2.0, 2.0]⊤for Case 1, [4.0, 4.0, 4.0]⊤for Case 2, [5.0, 5.0, 5.0]⊤for Case 3,
and [8.0, 8.0, 8.0]⊤for Case 4.
As shown in Figure 3, a variety of disturbances, including sinusoidal disturbances,
constant disturbances, and linear time-varying disturbances, are added to the system to
verify the robustness of the NFTBS. The bounded u f and τ of the QUAVs are depicted in
Figure 4, and the dashed red and green lines, respectively, represent the upper bounds of
u f and τ. The response curves of the system are shown in Figure 5.
Figure 3. The disturbances of the translational subsystem.
(a) Case 1
(b) Case 2
(c) Case 3
(d) Case 4
Figure 4. The constrained inputs.

## Page 13

Drones 2025, 9, 67
13 of 25
(a) The tracking trajectories
(b) The absolute values of the tracking errors
Figure 5. System response for the controllers with different parameters.
To compare the tracking errors of the system trajectories under different parameters,
the average absolute errors |ep1|avg and |eψ1|avg are defined as follows:
|ep1|avg =
Z 10
t=5 |ex|2 + |ey|2 + |ez|2dτ/5,
|eψ1|avg =
Z 10
t=5 |eψ|2dτ/5,
(30)
The tracking errors of the system are measured by calculating the absolute values of
the system errors after 5 s. The average errors are listed in Table 1.
Table 1. The mean of the absolute value of the errors.
Case 1
Case 2
Case 3
Case 4
|ep1|avg × 10−5(m2)
120.41
8.28
7.40
5.78
|eψ1|avg × 10−3(deg2)
5.45
5.45
5.45
20.37
Figure 5b and Table 1 demonstrate that increasing ξη1 improves the robustness of
the system and reduces position tracking error. However, if ξη1 becomes too large, it can
cause significant oscillations in the input of the rotational loop, as shown in Figure 4d,
and substantially increase the tracking error of the yaw angle. Taking all factors into
consideration, the parameters of the NFTBS in the following simulations are set in
Table 2.

## Page 14

Drones 2025, 9, 67
14 of 25
Table 2. Parameters for the NFTBS.
Parameters
Value
Parameters
Value
pη
0.5
pρ
0.5
kη11
[1.2, 1.2, 1.2]⊤
kρ11
[20.0, 20.0, 20.0]⊤
kη12
[0.2, 0.2, 0.2]⊤
kρ12
[1.2, 1.2, 1.2]⊤
mη11
[10.0, 10.0, 10.0]⊤
mρ11
[5.0, 5.0, 5.0]⊤
kη21 + ξη1
[5.0, 5.0, 5.0]⊤
kρ21 + ξρ1
[40.0, 40.0, 40.0]⊤
kη22
[1.5, 1.5, 1.5]⊤
kρ22
[1.5, 1.5, 1.5]⊤
mη21
[5.0, 5.0, 5.0]⊤
mρ21
[3.0, 3.0, 3.0]⊤
4.2. Fixed-Time Verification for the NFTBS
In this subsection, the fixed-time characteristic of the NFTBS controllers with different
initial conditions is shown.
With the same parameters for the nominal system without external disturbances
and the actuator failure, set the initial positions as η0 = [−2, −2, −2]⊤for Case 1,
η0 = [−1, −1, −1]⊤for Case 2, η0 = [2, 2, 2]⊤for Case 3, and η0 = [3, 3, 3]⊤for Case
4. The response curves of the system are shown in Figure 6.
(a) The tracking trajectories
(b) The tracking errors
Figure 6. System response for the different initial conditions.
By Figure 6b, with different initial conditions, all the tracking trajectories of the system
can converge in fixed time (T ≤1.7 s). The simulation results verify that the controller
proposed in this paper can ensure the fixed-time convergence of the system trajectory,
without relying on the initial values.
4.3. Comparison of Different Controllers with Actuator Failure
To further highlight the performance of FTDOB-NFTBS for the QUAV system with the
extra disturbance and the actuator failure, it is compared with the traditional proportional–
integral–derivative (PID), fixed-time proportional–derivative (FTPD) in [37], traditional
backstepping (BS) and NFTBS without the disturbance observer. To ensure fairness, the con-
troller parameters are carefully adjusted to achieve uniform convergence times. To thor-

## Page 15

Drones 2025, 9, 67
15 of 25
oughly validate the effectiveness of the algorithm presented in this paper, the simulation is
divided into two parts: continuous trajectory tracking and fixed-point tracking.
Case 1: Continuous Trajectories Tracking
A variety of disturbances, as in Figure 3, are added to the system.
In the simulation, the actuator failure indicators are set to Eη = 0.5 and Eρ =
diag(0.5, 0.5, 0.5) after 10 s to demonstrate partial actuator failure. Figure 7 shows the
disturbance observer output and the total disturbance, which includes both the extra dis-
turbance and the actuator failure. The red curve represents the true total disturbance,
encompassing both the extra disturbance and actuator failure. The blue curve shows the
output of the FTDO, while the orange curve represents the true extra disturbance. The no-
ticeable difference between the orange and red curves highlights the impact of the system
actuator failure. The results demonstrate that the FTDO used in this paper can quickly
and effectively track the total disturbances ∆η. Figure 8 displays the system’s constrained
inputs, with the dashed red and green lines representing the upper bounds of u f and τ,
respectively. It is important to note that these upper bounds decrease correspondingly as
the actuator experiences partial failure.
Figure 7. The disturbances and the observer output.
(a) PID
(b) FTPID
(c) BC
(d) NFTBS
(e) FTDOB-NFTBS
Figure 8. The constrained inputs.
The responses and errors of the system tracking trajectories are depicted in Figure 9.
To evaluate the system tracking errors before and after the occurrence of actuator failure,
the average absolute errors are defined as

## Page 16

Drones 2025, 9, 67
16 of 25
|ep2|avg =
Z 10
t=5 |ex|2 + |ey|2 + |ez|2dτ/5,
|ep3|avg =
Z 20
t=10 |ex|2 + |ey|2 + |ez|2dτ/10,
|eψ2|avg =
Z 10
t=5 |eψ|2dτ/5,
(31)
|eψ3|avg =
Z 20
t=10 |eψ|2dτ/10,
where |ep2|avg and |eψ2|avg are defined to evaluate the system tracking errors within 5–10 s
without actuator failure. |ep3|avg and |eψ3|avg are defined to evaluate the system tracking
errors within 10–20 s when the actuator failure occurs. The results are listed in Table 3.
(a) The tracking trajectories
(b) The tracking errors
Figure 9. System response for the different controllers
Table 3. The mean of the absolute value of the errors.
PID
FTPD
BC
NFTBS
FTDOB-NFTBS
|ep2|avg(m2)
0.26415
0.01019
0.02145
0.00011
0.00006
|ep3|avg(m2)
2.05642
2.95152
1.71243
0.05364
0.00049
|eψ2|avg(deg2)
22.38140
97.71323
0.02686
0.00534
0.00534
|eψ3|avg(deg2)
13.33856
16.18935
0.00130
0.00564
0.00582
In summary, all controllers are capable of stabilizing the QUAV in the absence of actua-
tor failure. However, the errors observed with the NFTBS controller and the FTDOB-NFTBS
controller are significantly smaller compared with the other three controllers. Furthermore,
Figure 9b shows that the tracking errors with the NFTBS and FTDOB-NFTBS controllers
converge to very small regions within 2 s. When actuator failure occurs, the yaw angle
tracking errors remain relatively unchanged across all five controllers. However, the posi-
tion tracking errors with the PID, FTPD, and BC controllers become unacceptably large,
with errors along the Z-axis exceeding 1 m. The FTDOB-NFTBS controller exhibits the best
performance, with its position tracking error being nearly one-tenth of that of the NFTBS.

## Page 17

Drones 2025, 9, 67
17 of 25
This highlights the effectiveness of the proposed FTDOB-NFTBS control framework, which
demonstrates superior performance in quickly and accurately tracking the reference signal
while mitigating the effects of external disturbance and actuator failure.
Case 2: Fixed-Point Tracking
Similar to Case 1, the actuator failure indicators are set to Eη = 0.5 and Eρ =
diag(0.5, 0.5, 0.5) after 10 s to demonstrate partial actuator failure. Figure 10 shows the
disturbance observer output and the total disturbance, which includes both the extra dis-
turbance and the actuator failure. The red curve represents the true total disturbance,
encompassing both the extra disturbance and actuator failure. The blue curve shows the
output of the FTDO. Figure 11 displays the system’s constrained inputs, with the dashed
red and green lines representing the upper bounds of u f and τ, respectively. It is important
to note that these upper bounds decrease correspondingly as the actuator experiences
partial failure.
Figure 10. The disturbances and the observer output.
(a) PID
(b) FTPID
(c) BC
(d) NFTBS
(e) FTDOB-NFTBS
Figure 11. The constrained inputs.
The responses and errors of the system tracking trajectories are depicted in Figure 12.
The average absolute errors are defined as (31), and the results are listed in Table 4.
In summary, all controllers are capable of stabilizing the QUAV in the absence of actua-
tor failure. However, the errors observed with the NFTBS controller and the FTDOB-NFTBS
controller are significantly smaller compared with the other three controllers. The error con-
vergence speed is also significantly faster than other controllers. Furthermore, Figure 12b
shows that the tracking errors with the NFTBS and FTDOB-NFTBS controllers can always
converge to very small regions within 2 s for suddenly changed reference points. When
actuator failure occurs, the position tracking errors with the PID, FTPD, and BC controllers
become unacceptably large, with errors along the Z-axis around 1 m. The FTDOB-NFTBS

## Page 18

Drones 2025, 9, 67
18 of 25
controller exhibits the best performance, with its position tracking error being less than
half of that of the NFTBS. This highlights the effectiveness of the proposed FTDOB-NFTBS
control framework, which demonstrates superior performance in quickly and accurately
tracking the reference signal while mitigating the effects of external disturbance and actua-
tor failure, even for the suddenly changed reference points.
(a) The tracking trajectories
(b) The tracking errors
Figure 12. System response for the different controllers.
Table 4. The mean of the absolute value of the errors.
PID
FTPD
BC
NFTBS
FTDOB-NFTBS
|ep2|avg(m2)
0.03800
0.005310
0.13152
8.56048 × 10−5
7.51011 × 10−6
|ep3|avg(m2)
0.99980
0.92244
0.87783
0.03901
0.01470
|eψ2|avg(deg2)
36.57489
29.35372
2.5053 × 10−5 5.20860 × 10−11
4.29421 × 10−11
|eψ3|avg(deg2) 711.16298 586.32013
0.00994
4.05917 × 10−6
3.08465 × 10−6
5. Conclusions
This paper presents an FTDOB-NFTBS framework with continuous input for QUAVs
that can effectively address challenges such as disturbance, input saturation, and actuator
failure. The control framework guarantees the system’s practical stability within a fixed
time and successfully avoids singularity and differential explosion issues. By integrating
an auxiliary variable, the proposed control framework efficiently compensates for input
saturation, while additional controls effectively suppress filter errors. Simulation results
highlight the potential and effectiveness of this proposed control framework.
Considering the practical application of the algorithm, in our future work, we plan to
incorporate the measurement noise of system states into the closed-loop control system.
Furthermore, inspired by [38,39], we will explore extending the proposed algorithm to
handle model-uncertain QUAV control. This extension aims to tackle the challenge of
achieving high-performance control for unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) when system
model parameters, such as mass and moment of inertia, are unknown.

## Page 19

Drones 2025, 9, 67
19 of 25
Author Contributions: T.H.: methodology, software and writing; K.L.: conceptualization and
supervision; Y.Y.: software, validation, visualization and data curation; C.-Y.W.: funding acquisition
and supervision; X.H.: investigation and supervision. All authors have read and agreed to the
published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research is funded by The Research Centre for Unmanned Autonomous Systems
(RCUAS), The Hong Kong Polytechnic University (Project No. P0046487).
Data Availability Statement: The data are only available upon request to the corresponding author.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Appendix A. The Proof of Theorem 1
Selecting the Lyapunov function candidate as V2 = 1
2e⊤
η eη + 1
2e⊤
2ηe2η and differentiat-
ing V2 yields
˙V2 =e⊤
η ˙eη + e⊤
2η ˙e2η
=e⊤
η [αη −˙ηd + e2η] + e⊤
2η[uη −g −kt
m ˙η + ∆η −˙αη]
=e⊤
η [ ˙ηd −kη11 ◦tanh(mη1 ◦eη) −kη12 ◦hη1(eη) −e⊤
η ˙ηd + e⊤
η e2η + e⊤
2η[−eη + g + kt
m ˙η
−zη3 + ση −(kη21 + ξη1) ◦tanh(mη2 ◦e2η) −kη22 ◦hη2(e2η) + ξη2 −g −kt
m ˙η + ∆η −˙αη −aη + aη]
= −e⊤
η [kη11 ◦tanh(mη11 ◦eη) + kη12 ◦hη1(eη)]
−e⊤
2η[kη21 ◦tanh(mη21 ◦e2η) + kη22 ◦hη2(e2η)]
−e⊤
2η[ξη1 ◦tanh(mη21 ◦e2η)]
+ e⊤
2η(∆η −zη3) + e⊤
2η(ση −˙αη1) + e⊤
2η(uη −uη) + e⊤
2ηξη2
= −
3
∑
i=1
kη11ieηi tanh(mη11ieηi) −
3
∑
i=1
kη12i|eηi|2+pη+pηsign(|eηi|−1)
−
3
∑
i=1
kη21ie2ηi tanh(mη21ie2ηi) −
3
∑
i=1
kη22i|e2ηi|2+pη+pηsign(|e2ηi|−1)
−
3
∑
i=1
ξη1ie2ηitanh(mη21ie2ηi)
+ e⊤
2η(∆η −zη3) + e⊤
2η(ση −˙αη1) + e⊤
2η(uη −uη) + e⊤
2ηξη2.
(A1)

## Page 20

Drones 2025, 9, 67
20 of 25
According to Lemma 2, there is −klijelj tanh(mlijelj) ≤−klijeljsign(mηijelj) +
kηij
mηijκ,
l = η, 2η and −ξlijelj tanh(mlijelj) ≤−klijeljsign(mηijelj) +
kηij
mηijκ, then (A1) becomes
˙V2 ≤−
3
∑
i=1
kη11i|eηi| +
3
∑
i=1
kη11i
mη11iκ −
3
∑
i=1
kη12i|eηi|2+pη+pηsign(|eηi|−1)
−
3
∑
i=1
kη21i|e2ηi| +
3
∑
i=1
kη21i
mη21iκ −
3
∑
i=1
kη22i|e2ηi|2+pη+pηsign(|e2ηi|−1)
−
3
∑
i=1
ξη1i|e2ηi| +
3
∑
i=1
ξη11i
mη21iκ + e⊤
2η ˜∆η + e⊤
2η ˜ση + e⊤
2η∆uη + e⊤
2ηξη2
≤−
3
∑
i=1
kη11i|eηi| −
3
∑
i=1
kη12i|eηi|2+pη+pηsign(|eηi|−1)
−
3
∑
i=1
kη21i|e2ηi| −
3
∑
i=1
kη22i|e2ηi|2+pη+pηsign(|e2ηi|−1)
−
3
∑
i=1
ξη1i|e2ηi| + 1
κ
3
∑
i=1
kiη + e⊤
2η ˜∆η + e⊤
2η ˜ση + e⊤
2η∆uη + e⊤
2ηξη2
(A2)
where kiη =
kη11i
mη11i +
kη21i+ξη1i
mη21i
. Choose another Lyapunov function candidate as V3 =
V2 + 1
2ξ⊤
η2ξη2 and differentiate V3. Then, one has
˙V3 ≤−
3
∑
i=1
kη11i|eηi| −
3
∑
i=1
kη12i|eηi|2+pη+pηsign(|eηi|−1)
−
3
∑
i=1
kη21i|e2ηi| −
3
∑
i=1
kη22i|e2ηi|2+pη+pηsign(|e2ηi|−1)
−
3
∑
i=1
ξη1i|e2ηi| + 1
κ
3
∑
i=1
kiη + e⊤
2η ˜∆η + e⊤
2η ˜ση + e⊤
2η∆uη + e⊤
2ηξη2 + ξ⊤
η2 ˙ξη2.
(A3)
If ∥∆aη∦= 0 or ∥ξη2∥> δ, we have
˙V3 ≤−
3
∑
i=1
kη11i|eηi| −
3
∑
i=1
kη12i|eηi|2+pη+pηsign(|eηi|−1)
−
3
∑
i=1
kη21i|e2ηi| −
3
∑
i=1
kη22i|e2ηi|2+pη+pηsign(|e2ηi|−1)
−
3
∑
i=1
ξη1i|e2ηi| + 1
κ
3
∑
i=1
kiη + e⊤
2η ˜∆η + e⊤
2η ˜ση + e⊤
2η∆uη + e⊤
2ηξη2
+ ξ⊤
η2(−ξη2 −kη31 ◦sign(ξη2) −kη32 ◦hξ(ξη2) −∥e2η∥2 + ∥∆uη∥2
∥ξη2∥2
ξη2 −∆uη)
≤−
3
∑
i=1
kη11i|eηi| −
3
∑
i=1
kη12i|eηi|2+pη+pηsign(|eηi|−1)
−
3
∑
i=1
kη21i|e2ηi| −
3
∑
i=1
kη22i|e2ηi|2+pη+pηsign(|e2ηi|−1)
−
3
∑
i=1
ξη1i|e2ηi| + 1
κ
3
∑
i=1
kiη + e⊤
2η ˜∆η + e⊤
2η ˜ση + e⊤
2η∆uη + e⊤
2ηξη2
−ξ⊤
η2ξη2 −
3
∑
i=1
kη31i|ξη2i| −
3
∑
i=1
kη32i|ξη2i|2+pη+pηsign(|ξη2i|−1) −∥e2η∥2 −∥∆uη∥2 −ξ⊤
η2∆uη.
(A4)

## Page 21

Drones 2025, 9, 67
21 of 25
For the vector v ∈R1×n, there is v⊤v = ∥v∥2. According to Young’s inequality, for the
vector v1, v2 ∈R1×n, there is v⊤
1 v2 ≤1
2∥v1∥2 + 1
2∥v2∥2. ˙V3 becomes
˙V3 ≤−
3
∑
i=1
kη11i|eηi| −
3
∑
i=1
kη12i|eηi|2+pη+pηsign(|eηi|−1)
−
3
∑
i=1
kη21i|e2ηi| −
3
∑
i=1
kη22i|e2ηi|2+pη+pηsign(|e2ηi|−1)
−
3
∑
i=1
kη31i|ξη2i| −
3
∑
i=1
kη32i|ξη2i|2+pη+pηsign(|ξη2i|−1) −
3
∑
i=1
ξη1i|e2ηi| + 1
κ
3
∑
i=1
kiη
+ ∥e2η∥(∥˜∆η∥+ ∥˜ση∥) + ∥e2η∥2 + 1
2∥∆uη∥2 + 1
2∥ξη2∥2
−∥ξη2∥2 −∥e2η∥2 −∥∆uη∥2 + 1
2∥ξη2∥2 + 1
2∥∆uη∥2.
(A5)
Performing some manipulations on ˙V3 yields
˙V3 ≤−
3
∑
i=1
kη11i|eηi| −
3
∑
i=1
kη12i|eηi|2+pη+pηsign(|eηi|−1)
−
3
∑
i=1
kη21i|e2ηi| −
3
∑
i=1
kη22i|e2ηi|2+pη+pηsign(|e2ηi|−1)
−
3
∑
i=1
kη31i|ξη2i| −
3
∑
i=1
kη32i|ξη2i|2+pη+pηsign(|ξη2i|−1)
−
3
∑
i=1
ξη1i|e2ηi| + 1
κ
3
∑
i=1
kiη + ∥e2η∥(∥˜∆η∥+ ∥˜ση∥).
(A6)
If ∥∆aη∥= 0 and ∥ξη2∥≤δ, with the fact | · | ≥∥· ∥, ˙V3 becomes
˙V3 ≤−
3
∑
i=1
kη11i|eηi| −
3
∑
i=1
kη12i|eηi|2+pη+pηsign(|eηi|−1)
−
3
∑
i=1
kη21i|e2ηi| −
3
∑
i=1
kη22i|e2ηi|2+pη+pηsign(|e2ηi|−1)
−
3
∑
i=1
ξη1i|e2ηi| + 1
κ
3
∑
i=1
kiη + e⊤
2η ˜∆η + e⊤
2η ˜ση + e⊤
2ηξη2
−ξ⊤
η2ξη2 −
3
∑
i=1
kη31i|ξη2i| −
3
∑
i=1
kη32i|ξη2i|2+pη+pηsign(|ξη2i|−1)
≤−
3
∑
i=1
kη11i|eηi| −
3
∑
i=1
kη12i|eηi|2+pη+pηsign(|eηi|−1)
−
3
∑
i=1
kη21i|e2ηi| −
3
∑
i=1
kη22i|e2ηi|2+pη+pηsign(|e2ηi|−1)
−
3
∑
i=1
kη31i|ξη2i| −
3
∑
i=1
kη32i|ξη2i|2+pη+pηsign(|ξη2i|−1)
−(ξη1 min −∥˜∆η∥−∥˜ση∥−∥ξη2∥)∥e2η∥+ 1
κ
3
∑
i=1
kiη −∥ξη2∥2,
(A7)
where ξη1 min = min(ξη11, ξη12, ξη13).

## Page 22

Drones 2025, 9, 67
22 of 25
Based on the above analysis and Lemma 4, if t > max(Tη1, Tη2), there are ∥˜∆η∥≤δη
and ∥˜ση∥= 0. By selecting ξη1 min > δη + δ, the following inequality always holds:
˙V3 ≤−
3
∑
i=1
kη11i|eηi| −
3
∑
i=1
kη12i|eηi|2+pη+pηsign(|eηi|−1)
−
3
∑
i=1
kη21i|e2ηi| −
3
∑
i=1
kη22i|e2ηi|2+pη+pηsign(|e2ηi|−1)
(A8)
−
3
∑
i=1
kη31i|ξη2i| −
3
∑
i=1
kη32i|ξη2i|2+pη+pηsign(|ξη2i|−1) + 1
κ
3
∑
i=1
kiη.
Different cases should be analyzed to demonstrate the fixed-time stability using
Lemma 1.
(1) For all |eηi| ≤1, |eη2i| ≤1 and |ξηi| ≤1, i = 1, 2, 3, there is
˙V3 ≤−
3
∑
i=1
kη11i|eηi| −
3
∑
i=1
kη12i|eηi|2
−
3
∑
i=1
kη21i|e2ηi| −
3
∑
i=1
kη22i|e2ηi|2
(A9)
−
3
∑
i=1
kη31i|ξη2i| −
3
∑
i=1
kη32i|ξη2i|2 + 1
κ
3
∑
i=1
kiη.
If 0 ≤V3 < 1, using Lemma 3 and the fact that |1|α = 1 and |χ| > |χ|1+pη for χ ∈R
and 0 < |χ| < 1, there is
˙V3 ≤−kη1 min
3
∑
i=1
(|e2
ηi|
1
2 + |e2
2ηi|
1
2 + |ξ2
η2i|
1
2 )
−kη2 min
3
∑
i=1
(|e2
ηi| + |e2
2ηi| + |ξ2
η2i|) + 1
κ
3
∑
i=1
kiη
(A10)
≤−
√
2kη1 minV
1
2
3 −2kη2 minV3 + µη.
≤−
√
2kη1 minV
1
2
3 −2kη2 minV
1+pη
3
+ µη
where kηi min = min(kη1i min, kη2i min, kη3i min), and kηji min = min(kηji1, kηji2, kηji3), i = 1, 2,
j = 1, 2, 3, µη = κ ∑3
i=1 kiη > 0 is a positive constant.
If V3 > 1, using Lemma 3 and the fact that |χ| > |χ|1+pη for χ ∈R and 0 < |χ| < 1,
there is
˙V3 ≤−
3
∑
i=1
kη11i|eηi| −
3
∑
i=1
kη12i|eηi|2+2pη
−
3
∑
i=1
kη21i|e2ηi| −
3
∑
i=1
kη22i|e2ηi|2+2pη
(A11)
−
3
∑
i=1
kη31i|ξη2i| −
3
∑
i=1
kη32i|ξη2i|2+2pη + 1
κ
3
∑
i=1
kiη
≤−
√
2kη1 minV
1
2
3 −2kη2 minV
1+pη
3
+ µη.

## Page 23

Drones 2025, 9, 67
23 of 25
(2) Based on the condition ∆uη ̸= 0 or ∥ξη2∥> δ, for all |eηi| > 1, |eη2i| > 1 and
|ξηi| > 1, i = 1, 2, 3, according to Lemma 3, there is
˙V3 ≤−
3
∑
i=1
kη11i|eηi| −
3
∑
i=1
kη12i|eηi|2+2pη
−
3
∑
i=1
kη21i|e2ηi| −
3
∑
i=1
kη22i|e2ηi|2+2pη
−
3
∑
i=1
kη31i|ξη2i| −
3
∑
i=1
kη32i|ξη2i|2+2pη + 1
κ
3
∑
i=1
kiη
≤−
√
2kη1 minV
1
2
3 −21+pη · 3−pηkη2 minV
1+pη
3
+ µη
= −
√
2kη1 minV
1
2
3 −2(3
2)−pηkη2 minV
1+pη
3
+ µη
≤−
√
2kη1 minV
1
2
3 −2kη2 minV
1+pη
3
+ µη.
(3) Except (1) and (2), with the fact that |χ|2 ≥|χ|2+2pη for χ ∈R and 0 < |χ| ≤1,
(A8) becomes
˙V3 ≤−
3
∑
i=1
kη11i|eηi| −
3
∑
i=1
kη12i|eηi|2+2pη
−
3
∑
i=1
kη21i|e2ηi| −
3
∑
i=1
kη22i|e2ηi|2+2pη
−
3
∑
i=1
kη31i|ξη2i| −
3
∑
i=1
kη32i|ξη2i|2+2pη + 1
κ
3
∑
i=1
kiη
≤−
√
2kη1 minV
1
2
3 −2kη2 minV
1+pη
3
+ µη.
To sum up, the following inequality holds:
˙V3 ≤−
√
2kη1 minV
1
2
3 −2kη2 minV
1+pη
3
+ µη.
According to Lemma 1, selecting k = 1, α =
√
2kη1 min, β = 2kη2 min, p = 1
2, and
q = 1 + pη, the trajectory of the translational subsystem is practically fixed-time stable, and
the settling time is bounded by
Tη < max(Tη1, Tη2) + Tη3
where
Tη3 <
√
2
kη1 minε +
1
2pηkη2 minε.
(A12)
Remark A1. With the introduction of switched variables, the proposed NFTBS controller achieves
a faster convergence speed compared with the traditional fixed-time controller satisfying (9). This is
because using the linear term eηi instead of the nonlinear term e
1+2pη
ηi
results in a quicker convergence
rate when the state of the system is close to the equilibrium point, i.e., |eηi| < 1. The same principle
applies to the rotational loop. This property can also be verified by the subsequent analysis.
For the traditional fixed-time stable system
˙V = −
√
2kη1 minV
1
2 −2kη2 minV1+pη + µη,
(A13)

## Page 24

Drones 2025, 9, 67
24 of 25
it is proved that the upper bound of the settling time as Lemma 2
TV ≤
√
2
kη1 minε +
1
2pηkη2 minε.
(A14)
However, according to (A10)
˙V3 ≤−
√
2kη1 minV
1
2
3 −2kη2 minV3 + µη
< −
√
2kη1 minV
1
2
3 −2kη2 minV
1+pη
3
+ µη,
for all 0 < |eηi| < 1, 0 < |eη2i| < 1 and 0 < |ξηi| < 1, i = 1, 2, 3. This indicates that V3 with the
proposed switched variables h(·) converges faster than the system (A13) under these conditions,
and the settling time Tη3 satisfies
Tη3 < TV ≤
√
2
kη1 minε +
1
2pηkη2 minε.
(A15)
In other words, the upper bound of the settling time of the proposed NFTBS is strictly smaller
than TV of the traditional fixed-time algorithm.
References
1.
Guo, Y.; Jiang, B.; Zhang, Y. A novel robust attitude control for quadrotor aircraft subject to actuator faults and wind gusts.
IEEE/CAA J. Autom. Sin. 2018, 5, 292–300. [CrossRef]
2.
Yuan, C.; Zhang, Y.; Liu, Z. A survey on technologies for automatic forest fire monitoring, detection, and fighting using unmanned
aerial vehicles and remote sensing techniques. Can. J. For. Res. 2015, 45, 783–792. [CrossRef]
3.
Shirani, B.; Najafi, M.; Izadi, I. Cooperative load transportation using multiple UAVs. Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 2019, 84, 158–169.
[CrossRef]
4.
Michael, N.; Mellinger, D.; Lindsey, Q.; Kumar, V. The GRASP Multiple Micro-UAV Testbed. IEEE Robot. Autom. Mag. 2010,
17, 56–65. [CrossRef]
5.
Rodriguez, W.E.; Ibarra, R.; Romero, G.; Lara, D. Comparison of Controllers for a UAV Type Quadrotor: Feedback Control by
Bessel’s Polynomials and LQR with Kalman Filter. Appl. Mech. Mater. 2014, 555, 40–48. [CrossRef]
6.
Mobayen, S. Design of LMI-based sliding mode controller with an exponential policy for a class of underactuated systems.
Complexity 2016, 21, 117–124. [CrossRef]
7.
Zhao, Y.; Lin, H.; Li, B. Sliding-Mode Clamping Force Control of Electromechanical Brake System Based on Enhanced Reaching
Law. IEEE Access 2021, 9, 19506–19515. [CrossRef]
8.
Mobayen, S.; Yazdanpanah, M.J.; Majd, V.J. A finite-time tracker for nonholonomic systems using recursive singularity-free
FTSM. In Proceedings of the 2011 American Control Conference, San Francisco, CA, USA, 29 June–1 July 2011; pp. 1720–1725.
9.
Mobayen, S.; Ma, J. Robust finite-time composite nonlinear feedback control for synchronization of uncertain chaotic systems
with nonlinearity and time-delay. Chaos Solitons Fractals 2018, 114, 46–54. [CrossRef]
10.
Azinheira, J.R.; Moutinho, A. Hover Control of an UAV With Backstepping Design Including Input Saturations. IEEE Trans.
Control Syst. Technol. 2008, 16, 517–526. [CrossRef]
11.
Wang, R.; Liu, J. Trajectory tracking control of a 6-DOF quadrotor UAV with input saturation via backstepping. J. Frankl. Inst.
2018, 355, 3288–3309. [CrossRef]
12.
Farrell, J.A.; Polycarpou, M.; Sharma, M.; Dong, W. Command Filtered Backstepping.
IEEE Trans. Autom. Control 2009,
54, 1391–1395. [CrossRef]
13.
Darbha, S.; Hedrick, J.K.; Yip, P.P.; Gerdes, J.C. Dynamic surface control for a class of nonlinear systems. IEEE Trans. Autom.
Control 2000, 45, 1893–1899.
14.
Xu, L.X.; Ma, H.J.; Guo, D.; Xie, A.H.; Song, D.L. Backstepping Sliding-Mode and Cascade Active Disturbance Rejection Control
for a Quadrotor UAV. IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatronics 2020, 25, 2743–2753. [CrossRef]
15.
Almakhles, D.J. Robust Backstepping Sliding Mode Control for a Quadrotor Trajectory Tracking Application. IEEE Access 2020,
8, 5515–5525. [CrossRef]
16.
Wang, F.; Gao, H.; Wang, K.; Zhou, C.; Zong, Q.; Hua, C. Disturbance Observer-Based Finite-Time Control Design for a Quadrotor
UAV With External Disturbance. IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst. 2020, 57, 834–847. [CrossRef]

## Page 25

Drones 2025, 9, 67
25 of 25
17.
Chen, F.; Jiang, R.; Zhang, K.; Jiang, B.; Tao, G. Robust Backstepping Sliding-Mode Control and Observer-Based Fault Estimation
for a Quadrotor UAV. IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. 2016, 63, 5044–5056. [CrossRef]
18.
Polyakov, A. Nonlinear Feedback Design for Fixed-Time Stabilization of Linear Control Systems. IEEE Trans. Autom. Control
2012, 57, 2106–2110. [CrossRef]
19.
Zuo, Z. Nonsingular fixed-time consensus tracking for second-order multi-agent networks.
Automatica 2015, 54, 305–309.
[CrossRef]
20.
Zuo, Z. Non-singular fixed-time terminal sliding mode control of non-linear systems. IET Control Theory Appl. 2015, 9, 545–552.
[CrossRef]
21.
Lopez-Ramirez, F.; Polyakov, A.E.; Efimov, D.V.; Perruquetti, W. Finite-time and fixed-time observer design: Implicit Lyapunov
function approach. Automatica 2018, 87, 52–60. [CrossRef]
22.
Basin, M.V.; Yu, P.; Shtessel, Y.B. Hypersonic Missile Adaptive Sliding Mode Control Using Finite- and Fixed-Time Observers.
IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. 2018, 65, 930–941. [CrossRef]
23.
Guo, J.; Li, Y.; Zhou, J. Qualitative indicator-based guidance scheme for bank-to-turn missiles against couplings and maneuvering
targets. Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 2020, 106, 106196. [CrossRef]
24.
Chen, M.; Wang, H.; Liu, X. Adaptive Practical Fixed-Time Tracking Control With Prescribed Boundary Constraints. IEEE Trans.
Circuits Syst. I Regul. Pap. 2021, 68, 1716–1726. [CrossRef]
25.
Li, Y.; Wang, M.; Xia, Q. Back-Stepping Fault-Tolerant Control Method of Morphing Aircraft Based on Fixed-Time Neural
Network Observer. J. Aerosp. Eng. 2025, 38, 04024119. [CrossRef]
26.
Wu, Y.; Fang, H.; Xu, T.; Wan, F. Adaptive fixed-time minimal learning force/position control of uncertain manipulators subject
to input saturation. Int. J. Adapt. Control Signal Process. 2023, 37, 790–810. [CrossRef]
27.
Hou, Z.; Lu, P.; Tu, Z. Nonsingular terminal sliding mode control for a quadrotor UAV with a total rotor failure. Aerosp. Sci.
Technol. 2020, 98, 105716. [CrossRef]
28.
Liu, K.; Wang, R. Antisaturation Command Filtered Backstepping Control-Based Disturbance Rejection for a Quadarotor UAV.
IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II Express Briefs 2021, 68, 3577–3581. [CrossRef]
29.
Liu, K.; Wang, R.; Wang, X.; Wang, X. Anti-saturation adaptive finite-time neural network based fault-tolerant tracking control
for a quadrotor UAV with external disturbances. Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 2021, 115, 106790. [CrossRef]
30.
Miao, Q.; Zhang, K.; Jiang, B. Fixed-Time Collision-Free Fault-Tolerant Formation Control of Multi-UAVs Under Actuator Faults.
IEEE Trans. Cybern. 2024, 54, 3679–3691. [CrossRef]
31.
Jiang, B.; Hu, Q.; Friswell, M.I. Fixed-Time Attitude Control for Rigid Spacecraft with Actuator Saturation and Faults. IEEE Trans.
Control Syst. Technol. 2016, 24, 1892–1898. [CrossRef]
32.
Jiang, B.; Hu, Q.; Friswell, M.I. Fixed-time rendezvous control of spacecraft with a tumbling target under loss of actuator
effectiveness. IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst. 2016, 52, 1576–1586. [CrossRef]
33.
Polycarpou, M.M.; Ioannou, P.A. A Robust Adaptive Nonlinear Control Design. In Proceedings of the 1993 American Control
Conference, San Francisco, CA, USA, 2–4 June 1993; pp. 1365–1369.
34.
Qian, C.; Lin, W. A continuous feedback approach to global strong stabilization of nonlinear systems. IEEE Trans. Autom. Control
2001, 46, 1061–1079. [CrossRef]
35.
Tian, B.; Zuo, Z.; Yan, X.; Wang, H. A fixed-time output feedback control scheme for double integrator systems. Automatica 2017,
80, 17–24. [CrossRef]
36.
Cruz-Zavala, E.; Moreno, J.A.; Fridman, L.M. Uniform Robust Exact Differentiator. IEEE Trans. Autom. Control 2011, 56, 2727–2733.
[CrossRef]
37.
Kang, J.; Shan, J.; Alkomy, H. Control Framework for a UAV Slung-Payload Transportation System. IEEE Control Syst. Lett. 2023,
7, 2473–2478. [CrossRef]
38.
Krasnova, S.A.; Antipov, A.S.; Krasnov, D.V.; Utkin, A.V. Cascade Synthesis of Observers of Mixed Variables for Flexible Joint
Manipulators Tracking Systems under Parametric and External Disturbances. Electronics 2023, 12, 1930. [CrossRef]
39.
Wang, H.; Zhang, Z.; Tang, X.; Zhao, Z.; Yan, Y. Continuous output feedback sliding mode control for underactuated flexible-joint
robot. J. Frankl. Inst. 2022, 359, 7847–7865. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
