# drones-07-00328-v2.pdf

## Page 1

Citation: Jing, Y.; Mirza, A.; Sipahi,
R.; Martinez-Lorenzo, J. Sliding
Mode Controller with Disturbance
Observer for Quadcopters;
Experiments with Dynamic
Disturbances and in Turbulent
Indoor Space. Drones 2023, 7, 328.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
drones7050328
Academic Editors: Zhaokui Wang,
Xiumin Diao and Lin Zhang
Received: 21 April 2023
Revised: 16 May 2023
Accepted: 18 May 2023
Published: 20 May 2023
Copyright:
© 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed
under
the
terms
and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
drones
Article
Sliding Mode Controller with Disturbance Observer for
Quadcopters; Experiments with Dynamic Disturbances and in
Turbulent Indoor Space
Yutao Jing 1,†
, Adam Mirza 1,†, Rifat Sipahi 1
and Jose Martinez-Lorenzo 1,2,*
1
Department of Mechanical & Industrial Engineering, Northeastern University, Boston, MA 02115, USA;
jing.yut@northeastern.edu (Y.J.); mirza.ad@northeastern.edu (M.A.); r.sipahi@northeastern.edu (R.S.)
2
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Northeastern University, Boston, MA 02115, USA
*
Correspondence: j.martinez-lorenzo@northeastern.edu
†
These authors contributed equally to this work.
Abstract:
In this study, a sliding mode surface controller (SMC) designed for a quadcopter is
experimentally tested. The SMC was combined with disturbance observers in six degrees of freedom
of the quadcopter to effectively reject external disturbances. While respecting stability conditions all
control parameters were automatically initialized and tuned using a simulation-based ofﬂine particle
swarm optimization (PSO) algorithm, followed by onboard manual ﬁne-tuning. To demonstrate its
superiority, the SMC was compared with a PSO-optimized PID controller in terms of agility, stability,
and the accurate tracking of hover, rectangular, and ﬁgure-eight pattern trajectories. To evaluate its
robustness, the SMC controller was extensively tested in a small, enclosed, turbulent space while
being subjected to a series of external disturbances, such as hanging payloads and lateral wind.
Keywords: sliding mode control; disturbance observer; unmanned aerial vehicles; quadcopter;
nonlinear control; particle swarm optimization; experimental validation; payload; trajectory tracking;
wind rejection
1. Introduction
Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), specifically those with multirotors, are being used in a
growing number of applications that require robust and reliable performance under a variety
of operating conditions. These applications cover a range of civil use cases, such as product
delivery [1], structure inspection [2], aerial photography [3], agriculture and search [4],
disaster relief [5], and rescue [6,7]. Additionally, UAVs are used in a variety of defense
applications, including reconnaissance [8], threat identification [9], and surveillance [10].
Most commercially available multirotor UAVs, such as quadcopters, use PID (pro-
portional integral derivative) controllers [11]. These controllers have a simple and linear
structure that can be easily tuned. However, due to their simple nature and low complexity,
these controllers struggle under noise, latency, and external disturbances. In response to
these shortcomings, researchers have modiﬁed the PID controller structure to be more
robust to system disturbances and unknown parameters. For example, in [12], Goel et
al. provide a numerical investigation of the performance of the adaptive autopilot on a
quadcopter and propose an adaptive PID control scheme designed for a UAV with un-
known dynamics. Dong and He [13] propose fuzzy logic PID controllers for quadcopters
in simulations: a control method combining PID-ILC (iterative learning control) and fuzzy
control to achieve robustness to disturbances and model uncertainties. To further improve
the robustness of the controller against wind disturbances, Zhou et al. [14] designed a
cascade inner-loop PID angular rate control and an outer-loop PID attitude control for
the UAV. The PID gain automatically tuned by reinforcement learning neural networks is
Drones 2023, 7, 328. https://doi.org/10.3390/drones7050328
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/drones

## Page 2

Drones 2023, 7, 328
2 of 41
also discussed in the ﬁeld of UAV control [15], where the proposed method demonstrates
effectiveness by both software- and hardware-in-the-loop simulations.
Some researchers have moved beyond PID controllers to more complex and robust
control schemes. Several adaptive and nonlinear controllers are proposed, including the
nonlinear adaptive intelligent controller [16], which incorporates fuzzy logic and neural
networks, model predictive controllers (MPC) [17], to provide a nonlinear model predictive
control law, and adaptive backstepping controllers [18,19], which can be used for velocity
ﬁeld following and timed trajectory tracking. Sliding mode control offers a robust way
to maintain the stability of unknown UAV dynamics [20]. Indeed, sliding mode surface
controller (SMC) can overcome uncertainties in the system and provide good control on
nonlinear systems. Importantly, one can incorporate explicitly into SMC the upper bounds
of uncertainties in the dynamics. Lenaick et al. [21] theoretically show SMC’s characteristics
of a fast response, simple operation, and robustness to external environmental disturbances.
The basic idea of SMC is to design a switching hyperplane (sliding surface) according
to the dynamic characteristics of the system and then drive the tracking error from outside
the hyperplane to this hyperplane by sliding mode controllers. Once the states reach the
hyperplane, the controller then guides the error dynamics to zero. R. Guruganesh [22] veri-
ﬁes a second-order sliding mode approach and implements it on a ﬁxed-wing micro aerial
vehicle (MAV). Instead of multicopters, they experimentally show that the performance
of the sliding mode controller exceeds a benchmark classical controller with a ﬁxed-wing
UAV. Another work by En-Hui in [23] demonstrates the effectiveness and robustness of
a proposed SMC control method through simulations. Currently, most of the research
related to sliding-mode-controlled quadcopters relies on computer simulations to vali-
date the proposed methods and theories. Although some attempts built real-world UAV
prototypes to achieve trajectory tracking tasks, such as a rectangular trajectory [24], the
prototypes were implemented in combinations of PID and SMC, i.e., partial SMC attitude
controllers without disturbance observers; meanwhile, the position is controlled by a tra-
ditional PID, which leads to potential performance degradation in ﬂight dynamics when
exposed to disturbances.
In contrast to PID controllers, however, tuning SMC parameters is less intuitive. Par-
ticle swarm optimization (PSO) has been used to aid in the design and tuning of various
types of controllers, including PID [25], SMC [26], and fuzzy logic controllers [27]. PSO
is a computationally inexpensive optimization algorithm when dealing with nonlinear
functions. It works by tracking a set of particles through the parameter space of inter-
est, searching for the best solution parameters that optimize closed-loop performance as
quantiﬁed by certain metrics. The swarming behavior of the particles promotes exploring
regions adjacent to both a particle’s local best solution and the swarm’s current global best
solution [28].
While there are a number of options for control design, one should also consider
whether to design attitude controllers based on quaternions (see, e.g., [29]) or on Euler
angles (see, e.g., [30]). Quaternions are particularly useful for describing rotations in three
dimensions [31], with the main advantage of avoiding the problem of gimbal lock that may
otherwise occur with Euler angles when two of the rotation axes align [32], causing a loss
of one degree of freedom. However, Euler angles are more intuitive, representing rotations
around the principal axes (X, Y, and Z) or roll, pitch, and yaw, respectively. Most sensors
directly provide the measurements in Euler angles, making their integration into control
systems straightforward. Moreover, Euler angles can be more computationally efﬁcient
in certain situations [32]. Quaternion-based controllers are not short of advantages; for
example, previous work demonstrates their promise in situations where aggressive drone
maneuvers might be preferred [33], including experimental results [34] and combining
them with SMC [35]. Given the importance of continuity from our previous work [26], we
utilize here the SMC controller from the cited study with Euler angles.
Based on our previous research [26] regarding a PSO-optimized SMC with distur-
bance observers (Figure 1: phases (1) to (3)), we have already developed the control theory

## Page 3

Drones 2023, 7, 328
3 of 41
and validated the controller using a simulated PX4-conducted (an open-source autopilot)
quadcopter. To summarize the work, we ﬁrstly designed the SMC controllers as well
as corresponding disturbance observers in MATLAB/SIMULINK for the theory valida-
tion and then optimized SMC parameters using an ofﬂine PSO method. We also built a
PX4-conducted quadcopter simulator to validate the optimized SMC. In simulations, we
compared this SMC with several PSO-optimized PID controllers and showed its superiority.
The PSO-optimized SMC with disturbance observers facilitated more accurate and faster
UAV adaptation against disturbances in the environment.
Design controller & PSO Tuning in 
MATLAB/SIMULINK
SMC Controller validation in 
Gazebo simulator
PID UAV
SMC UAV
Results analysis 
and comparison
Offboard trajectories 
Design & Compile
Offline PSO Tuning
Nom
Nom
Nom
a. HOVER
b. RECTANGLE
c. FIGURE-8
Indoor closed, turbulent cage
Prior work
Current work
Figure 1. Overall structure of this paper.
To further validate our proposed SMC controller, in this work, we designed a series
of indoor experiments for an actual quadcopter as shown in Figure 1 phases (4) to (6).
In order to be compatible with the actual UAV as well as its autopilot, we upgraded the
proposed control theory, improved the initialization and tuning of the PSO algorithm,
optimized the control signal mixing algorithm, and tested the ﬁne-tuned SMC parameters.
Unlike most of the current theoretical research, here we validate not only the feasibility and
stability of SMC through nominal ﬂights but also the reliability of SMC against dynamic
disturbances. These disturbances are designed as a series of imbalanced force/torque loads
and turbulence in narrow and closed spaces as shown in Figure 2. These disturbances were
applied to the UAV to mimic the most likely future indoor scenarios and to evaluate how
well SMC performs.
To the best of our knowledge, most studies on SMC rely on computer simulations
and remain in the theoretical phase [36–43], while implementation of SMC on actual quad-
copters is rare and limited [44], let alone extensive experiments in extreme environments.
This is likely because the hardware implementation is quite involved and bridging theory
with practice is not straightforward. First, the frequency of the control signal must not be
too low to ensure the stability of the control, so the signal synchronization process becomes
important. In this study, we use the PX4 open-source autopilot, which provides ﬁxed-rate
and continuous feedback of sensor signals and actuator signal outputs. However, due to

## Page 4

Drones 2023, 7, 328
4 of 41
hardware limitations, the control frequency cannot be too high, so the controller frequency
and the fundamental sampling frequency are ﬁxed at 250 Hz. Second, we need to ﬁlter
sensor data within a reasonable bandwidth due to unavoidable sensor uncertainties, such
as noise and signal gaps. Here, we use an extended Kalman ﬁlter (EKF) estimator with a
cutoff frequency of 30 Hz for the IMU/GYRO sensor to reduce computational consumption
and UAV vibration. Third, due to the delay and response time of the actuator, which can be
negligible in simulations but critical when dealing with real UAVs, we choose a reasonable
PWM update rate, which is 400 Hz, based on the type of motors utilized. At the same time,
the mixing process of the actuator signals is unavoidable for the hardware implementation,
without which the PWM signals can easily exceed or fall below the physical limit values,
causing instability. This can be also an issue for the sensitivity of disturbance observers,
which estimate dynamic disturbances and feedback these estimates to the main control
loop for disturbance rejection. Therefore, including a reasonable control signal mixing is
critical to ensure the aerial stability of the UAV in the real world. Fourth, the PSO algorithm
is not implemented in real time because of its high computation cost and time-consuming
process. Instead, the PSO tuning results are based on a purely mathematical model and
take into account the theoretical stability of the SMC. In more detail, the PSO is run and
iterated in conjunction with SIMULINK, after which we encode and embed PSO-tuned
parameters onboard the UAV. Note that not all PSO-tuned parameters are applicable to an
actual UAV; thus, a further manual tuning process is required. We modify the parameters
judiciously via an initial calibration phase ﬁrst, according to different orientations (pitch,
roll, and yaw) and different directions (X, Y, and Z) of the quadcopter. Although we have
simultaneously developed an in-ﬂight remote SMC parameter adjustment system that
relies on a lightweight wireless communication protocol called MAVLink, we do not rec-
ommend adjusting parameters in-ﬂight because of the possibility of improper adjustment
leading to an accidental crash. Instead, we start a brand new ﬂight after the hardware
coding and updating of each parameter and ﬁnally evaluate the ﬂight performance in
terms of settling time, overshoot, and rise time based on the ﬂight log data. Finally, after
each iteration of parameter tuning or controller modiﬁcation, we use the MATLAB code
generator to automatically generate the C code and upload the new ﬁrmware to the actual
UAV microcontroller board.
KG
Figure 2. Experiments in a narrow, closed, turbulent indoor space.
In view of the above discussions, the novelty of our work can be summarized as fol-
lows: We ﬁrst demonstrate what additional steps are needed when transitioning from [26]

## Page 5

Drones 2023, 7, 328
5 of 41
the particle swarm optimization (PSO)-tuned sliding mode control (SMC) with a distur-
bance observer (DOB) to real-time control, hardware implementation, and experiments.
This is a topic of strong interest but with little guidance in the open literature. Next, we
demonstrate how the drone performs at the face of a set of complex disturbances, such as
wind and unbalanced weights under SMC, and in particular show how a combination of
these disturbances can still be addressed by SMC—an experimental condition that does
not exist in the literature to the best of our knowledge. Furthermore, we complement the
SMC experiments with those by PID controllers as industry-standard benchmarks, for
comparisons with respect to SMC. Lastly, with the use of the DOB, we demonstrate how to
estimate wind direction and wind forces in real time—a critical capability in monitoring
the environment and atmospheric conditions. These results add to the body of literature
rapidly growing and will help support future research into the robust control of drones in
challenging environments.
In the next section, the system is deﬁned and the equations of motion for the quad-
copter are summarized. In Section 3, the SMC control laws are developed for the attitude
and position dynamics, a disturbance observer is designed, improvements in the control
signal mixing process are explained, and the tuning process on the physical UAV is out-
lined. Next, in Section 4, the experimental setup is described, the step response of the
SMC is evaluated, and the trajectory following capabilities of the SMC are compared to a
commercial PID controller. Each controller is subject to a variety of disturbance conditions
in a narrow, closed, and turbulent chamber.
2. System Deﬁnition
Equations of Motion
In this manuscript, the north–east–down (NED) coordinate frame is used for the UAV
positioning, and Euler angles are used for the attitude control. The coordinate system
relative to the S500-frame UAV is shown in Figure 3, including X, Y, Z, p, q, r, φ, θ, and ψ.
x’
y’
z’
Roll (∅)
Angular velocity (p)
Pitch (𝜭)
Angular velocity (q)
Yaw (𝝍)
Angular velocity (r)
Motor 3
(CW)
Motor 1
(CCW)
Motor 4
(CW)
Motor 2
(CCW)
North
X
East
Y
Down
Z
Figure 3. Euler angles and coordinate system of the S500-frame quadcopter used in the experiments.
As seen from Figure 3, coordinates X, Y, and Z deﬁne the global NED coordinate
system; x′, y′, and z′ are in the UAV’s body coordinate system; p, q, and r are angular
velocities in the UAV body frame about x′, y′, and z′, respectively; and φ, θ, and ψ are Euler
angles for roll, pitch, and yaw, respectively.
The equations of motion (see [26,45,46]) are given by the following:

## Page 6

Drones 2023, 7, 328
6 of 41

































































¨x
= −1
m[(sin φ sin ψ + cos φ sin θ cos ψ) · (T1 + T2 + T3 + T4)
+K1 · ˙x · | ˙x|]
¨y
= −1
m[(−sin φ cos ψ + cos φ sin θ sin ψ) · (T1 + T2 + T3 + T4)
+K1 · ˙y · | ˙y|]
¨z
= −1
m[(cos φ cos θ)(T1 + T2 + T3 + T4) + K1 · ˙z · | ˙z|] + g
˙p
= 1
Jx [
√
2
2 l(T2 + T3 −T1 −T4) −q · r(Jz −Jy) −K2 · p · |p|]
˙q
= 1
Jy [
√
2
2 l(T1 + T3 −T2 −T4) −p · r(Jx −Jz) −K2 · q · |q|]
˙r
= 1
Jz [(Q1 + Q2 −Q3 −Q4) −p · q(Jy −Jx) −K2 · r · |r|]
˙φ
= p + q · tan θ sin φ + r · tan θ cos φ
˙θ
= q · cos φ −r · sin φ
˙ψ
= q sin φ
cos θ + r cos φ
cos θ
(1)
where model parameters are deﬁned in Table 1, based on an evaluation of the UAV CAD
model and the speciﬁcations provided by the manufacturer. Here, T1−4 are the thrusts of
each propeller and Q1−4 are anti-torques at each motor caused by the propellers. From
the UAV model in Figure 3, each propeller generates a thrust in the −z′ direction and an
anti-torque around −z′ direction given by
(
Ti = Tmax · vi
Qi = Qmax · vi
(2)
where vi are the normalized actuator signals v1−4, Tmax is the full thrust of one motor, and
Qmax is an anti-torque at the full thrust of one motor.
Table 1. Dynamics model parameters.
Parameter
Value
Unit
Deﬁnition
m
1.300
kg
Mass of UAV
g
9.810
m/s2
Gravity
l
0.250
m
Distance between the center of the motor and the center
of the UAV
Jx
0.015
kg · m2
Moment of inertia in x
Jy
0.016
kg · m2
Moment of inertia in y
Jz
0.029
kg · m2
Moment of inertia in z
K1
1.00
N
(m/s)
The air drag force coefﬁcient
K2
0.025
N·m
(rad/s)
The air drag torque coefﬁcient
Tmax
9.600
N
The full thrust of one motor
Qmax
0.150
N · m
The anti-torque at the full thrust of one motor

## Page 7

Drones 2023, 7, 328
7 of 41
Utilizing the thrusts Ti and anti-torques Qi, we can deﬁne the normalized control
signals τT, τP, τR, and τY that affect the thrust, pitch motion, roll motion, and yaw motion
of the UAV, respectively:
τT = T1 + T2 + T3 + T4
4Tmax
τR = T2 + T3 −T1 −T4
4Tmax
τP = T1 + T3 −T2 −T4
4Tmax
τY = Q1 + Q2 −Q3 −Q4
4Qmax
(3)
where the thrust signal τT ranges from 0 to 1, while the other signals all range from −1 to 1.
It is important to note that the control signals τT, τP, τR, and τY are prescribed by SMC (see
Section 3) and are deﬁned in the “body” frame of the drone. These signals appear in (p, q, r)
expressions in Equation (1) and are converted to the inertial frame through trigonometric
identities that can be found in the expressions of ( ˙φ, ˙θ, ˙ψ) in Equation (1).
The next step is to utilize the equations of motion of the UAV to design the control
laws such that the UAV can track trajectories in a stable manner. This is discussed in the
next subsection.
3. Control Design
3.1. Sliding Mode Control and Disturbance Observer
Sliding mode control (SMC) is a type of variable structure control with a nonlinear
control law. In this section, we ﬁrst present a simple example without disturbances to show
the controller derivation process and then provide the details of SMC design for the UAV
in Appendix A.
Consider that we have a nonlinear system of the form ¨w = F(w) + βu, where
w ∈[x, y, z, φ, θ, ψ] is the continuous UAV state, F(w) is a nonlinear function with continu-
ous derivatives with respect to each state, and β is a known constant. First, the controller u
is deﬁned as u = usw + uo, where uo is the nominal part and usw is the switching part. The
goal is to track a desired, continuous, sufﬁciently smooth signal wdes, i.e., the tracking error
should satisfy ew = w −wdes →0 as t →∞.
In SMC, a sliding surface is deﬁned with the error dynamics of the system. While this
surface can be deﬁned in various ways, here, the sliding surface is taken to be in the form
sw = αwew + ˙ew, where αw > 0 can be tuned. To perform the stability analysis, we choose
the Lyapunov function V(s) = 1
2s2
w > 0, and therefore ˙V(s) = sw ˙sw < 0 must hold as the
sufﬁcient condition for the system to be stable. Given that ˙sw = αw ˙ew + ¨ew, we can write
˙V(s) = sw ˙sw = sw(αw ˙ew + ¨ew)
= sw(αw ˙ew + ¨w −¨wdes)
= sw(αw ˙ew + F(w) + βu −¨wdes)
= sw(αw ˙ew + F(w) + βuo + βusw −¨wdes)
(4)
Next, the nominal terms in the last line above can be cancelled out by proposing the
nominal control law as
uo = 1
β(−F(w) + ¨wdes)
(5)

## Page 8

Drones 2023, 7, 328
8 of 41
Hence, with the following switching control law,
usw = 1
β(−E1sgn(s) −E2s −E3 ˙ew)
(6)
where E1, E2, and E3 are positive values, and ˙V becomes
˙V(s) = s[(αw −E3) · ˙ew −E1 · sgn(s) −E2 · s]
(7)
It is easy to show that by selecting E1, E2, and E3 as





E3 −αw = 0
E1 > 0
E2 ≥0
(8)
we can prove that ˙V < 0 always holds. This means the controller u = usw + uo will promote
the tracking error ew = w −wdes →0 as t →∞.
To avoid actuator chattering, we next replace the sgn operation with a saturation
function as is the practice in the literature [47,48]. Speciﬁcally,
sat( s
ϵ) =





s
ϵ,
|s| < ϵ
sgn( s
ϵ) =
(
1,
s ≥ϵ
−1,
s ≤−ϵ
,
|s| ≥ϵ,
(9)
where ϵ > 0 is a small user-defined constant value. Thus, the final form of the control law reads
u = 1
β(−E1sat( s
ϵ) −E2s −E3 ˙ew −F(w) + ¨wdes)
(10)
To enhance the surface reaching performance, we further deﬁne E1 as a positive time-
varying variable related to the instantaneous position and velocity errors in the X–Y–Z
coordinates. That is, a larger position error and a larger velocity error together contribute to
a larger E1 and hence the action on the UAV toward achieving e →0. However, to smooth
high-frequency system oscillations near the sliding surfaces and ensure system stability, it
is useful to deﬁne the minimum positive threshold k1 for horizontal XY movement and k3
for vertical Z movement. In attitude control, however, we ﬁx E1 as a positive constant k7 to
achieve a more straightforward angular tracking. To summarize,
E1 =









max
w∈x,y(k1, b1 · |ew| + b2 · | ˙ew|)
max
w∈z (k3, b3 · |ew| + b4 · | ˙ew|)
k7, w ∈φ, θ, ψ
(11)
where k1, k3, k7, b1, b2, b3, and b4 > 0 are tunable control gains for the sliding reaching laws.
When tuning these gains, stability conditions rendered from (8) must be strictly enforced.
We next deﬁne E2 as
E2 =





c,
w ∈x, y
0,
w ∈z
0,
w ∈φ, θ, ψ
(12)
where E2 is a positive tunable constant c only for XY, such that the E2 · s term in (7)
generates an exponentially decaying term to promote tracking efﬁciency. With the beneﬁts
of this exponential term, the reaching rate in XY has a large value at the beginning of the
UAV motion, and then it decreases to zero gradually when reaching XY setpoints. Again,
for altitude and attitude control, E2 has been set to zero to reduce oscillations.

## Page 9

Drones 2023, 7, 328
9 of 41
Consequently, the above general SMC design approach can be implemented one by
one on X, Y, Z, roll (φ), pitch (θ), and yaw (ψ) motions of the UAV, paying attention to
the couplings among the six degrees of freedom (see Appendix A). This effort leads to six
baseline SMC control laws (u1, u2, τThrust (τT), τRoll (τR), τPitch (τP), τyaw (τY)) for each
DoF, respectively. The control structure of the overall ﬂight controller is shown in Figure 4.
Decouple
angles
SMC Y 
controller
SMC Z 
controller
SMC Pitch 
controller
SMC X 
controller
SMC Roll 
controller
SMC Yaw 
controller
Mixer
Nonlinear 
drone 
dynamics
Disturbance 
observer Z
Disturbance 
observer X
Disturbance 
observer Y
Disturbance 
observer Yaw
Disturbance 
observer Roll
Disturbance 
observer Pitch
desired z
z
τ_𝑇ℎ𝑟𝑢𝑠𝑡′
Normalized 
signals
[𝑣1, 𝑣2 , 𝑣3, 𝑣4]
Actuators
Disturbance 
Force
Disturbance 
Torque
desired x
desired y
𝑢1′
𝑢2′
desired yaw
desired pitch
desired roll
yaw
pitch
roll
Sensor data
τ_𝑌𝑎𝑤′
τ_𝑃𝑖𝑡𝑐ℎ′
τ_𝑅𝑜𝑙𝑙′
x
y
SMC altitude controller
SMC position controller
SMC attitude controller
yaw
Figure 4. The quadcopter sliding mode control structure diagram.
Furthermore, each SMC is equipped with a disturbance observer to correct for external
disturbances. When continuous force and torque disturbances are applied to the system
dynamics, these observers actively estimate the disturbances and reject them by adding the
magnitude of these disturbances in opposite polarity to the baseline control actions. Hence,
thrust, roll, pitch, and yaw control signals are resized as τ′
T, τ′
R, τ′
P, and τ′
Y, respectively, as
explained in Appendix A.
3.2. Control Signal Mixing
Control signal mixing is an unavoidable part of driving an actual quadcopter. In prac-
tice, the controller calculates the saturated control actions τ′
T, τ′
R, τ′
P, and τ′
Y, as determined
by SMC. These actions are a composite of the four motor speeds. Hence, they must be
mapped back to each motor. This is achieved by sending these control actions to the mixer,
which scales and converts them to actuators’ native units such as pulse-width modulation
(PWM); that is, this process converts the control output signals τ into PWM signals ranging
from 1000 to 2000, which is ﬁnally fed into the electronic speed controllers (ESCs). As a
result, the individual motors can be actuated accordingly using a mixer (see Figure 4).


v1
v2
v3
v4

= (1000 ·


1
1
−1
1
1
−1
1
1
1
−1
−1
−1
1
1
1
−1

·


τ′
T
τ′
R
τ′
P
τ′
Y

−Pmin) ·
1
Pmax −Pmin
,
(13)
where v1, v2, v3, and v4 are normalized PWM signals.

## Page 10

Drones 2023, 7, 328
10 of 41
As an introduction, a simple mixer architecture could be adopted, which has a straight-
forward diagram as shown in Figure 5. Moreover, τRoll and τPitch inputs are saturated to
the range from −0.05 to 0.05, τYaw ranges from −0.2 to 0.2, and τThrust ranges from 0.0 to
1.0. Based on our previous experimental results, this architecture was feasible for taking
off and even tracking some speciﬁc trajectories if ignoring its attendant over-saturation
problems. To remedy these issues and the potential crash risk at the face of uncertainty
in the environment and due to the sudden appearance of disturbances, a safer mixing
approach was adopted.
Figure 5. A simple mixer structure.
In the proposed method, the τRoll, τPitch, and τYaw inputs were limited to the range
from −1.0 to 1.0, and τThrust ranged from 0.0 to 1.0 as shown in Figure 6. Compared to
the previous simple mixer, although this new mixer can provide a larger control range
and thus be more ﬂexible, in practice it may saturate a motor when the motor command
becomes negative. In other words, motor commands exceed the lower bound. This would
happen when a low thrust τ′
T and large negative roll command τ′
R are demanded, which
is physically impossible to execute unless the motors are reversible. In such a case, we
can unsaturate the τ values by increasing τ′
T to boost the motors and in the meanwhile
reducing the attitude control commands τ′
R, τ′
P, and τ′
Y such that none of motor commands
goes below zero. Our experiments also show scenarios where motor commands exceed the
upper boundary, e.g., for a high thrust τ′
T and large positive roll control factor τ′
R. In this
case, we can easily unsaturate the control signals by reducing the thrust τ′
T to ensure that
no motor is commanded to exceed its maximum limitation.
Figure 6. Improved mixer structure.

## Page 11

Drones 2023, 7, 328
11 of 41
The top section of Figure 6 suggests mixing the pitch and roll but without yaw; that is
because the primary task is to make sure of the UAV’s position stability regardless of its
heading accuracy. In this procedure, the roll, pitch and thrust are mixed ﬁrst:
Mixer Thrust/Roll/Pitch =


1
0.707107
−0.707107
1
−0.707107
0.707107
1
−0.707107
−0.707107
1
0.707107
0.707107


(14)
where they are scaled by gains of 1/
√
2 to smooth the pitch and roll control effects for
the symmetric quadcopter frame. After this mixer is applied, the thrust control input is
unsaturated if needed. During this process, the τThrust term will be adjusted slightly by a
certain gain to meet the requirement of the maximum or the minimum actuator limitation.
After tuning the thrust, the roll and pitch terms are ready to be unsaturated if necessary to
reduce their angular acceleration effects.
The lower section in Figure 6 is proposed to mix the yaw using the yaw mixer matrix
as follows:
Mixer Yaw =


1
1
−1
−1


(15)
This mixer remains unchanged from Figure 5. In this study, the diagonal arms of the
symmetric UAV have the same rotation direction, so the ﬁrst and second rows in the yaw
mixer matrix have the same values and are both positive. Similarly, the third and fourth
terms have the same value but opposite directions with respect to the ﬁrst two terms to
ensure their total torque in the Z direction is zero. After mixing the yaw for each control
output, another unsaturation function will be applied to the yaw control input to modify
yaw acceleration if needed. Finally, we adjust the τThrust again before feeding these control
inputs into the PWM calculator box.
Inside the PWM calculator box, the idle-speed terms and certain offsets will be added
to control signals to ensure actuators’ arming states, and baseline PWM will be applied to
respective motors, normally 1000; hence, PWM signals are constrained in the range of 1000
to 2000.
The necessity of improving and extending the mixer structure is that they tend to
easily overﬂow actuators’ limitations after adding the disturbance terms onto the control
inputs without the mixer in Figure 6, which leads to poor UAV tracking in attitude and
position, and even crashes, although the controllers are performing as desired. As shown
in Figure 7, when using the simple mixer the UAV loaded with a hanging weight could
not ﬁnish the pre-conﬁgured ﬁgure-eight pattern trajectory, and it crashed at the halfway
point of the ﬂight. However, after improving the mixer, the UAV could ﬁnish this complex
ﬂight pattern easily and successfully. Furthermore, it can be observed that the UAV motion
becomes much smoother with fewer oscillations in PWM as shown in Figure 7. In short,
the SMC control inputs are adjusted and modiﬁed through the proposed mixing algorithm
to avoid accidents caused by over-saturation.

## Page 12

Drones 2023, 7, 328
12 of 41
Figure 7. Figure-eight trajectory tracking experimental results: before and after mixer improvement.
3.3. Controller Tuning
The SMC designed above has over 30 tunable parameters, each having complex
nonlinear interactions with the other parameters. Tuning a controller of this complexity
manually would be extremely difﬁcult and would likely result in a sub-optimal result.
Conversely, this controller is sensitive to model parameters and unmodeled actuator and
sensor dynamics, so a simulation-only optimization of the controller would not perform
well under real-world conditions. To this end, a hybrid tuning approach was adopted.
First, a PSO simulation-based tuning was performed as a coarse controller tuning approach
to bring the UAV as close as possible to the desired performance. Then, a manual ﬁne-
tuning was performed through a series of experiments on the real UAV to optimize the
controller performance.
PSO was selected to tune the SMC since it is simple to implement and is effective at
optimizing high dimensional parameters spaces [49]. The tuning was performed only in
time simulations, using step inputs along the X, Y, Z, and yaw for training and using a
complex trajectory for validating. The scoring was based on an equal weight combination
of sub-scores based on ITAE (integral time absolute error), overshoot, undershoot, and
settling time. The scheme used for scoring was designed to minimize steady-state errors
and provide a fast, smooth response to inputs. The number of particles chosen was 50
and the optimization was run for 100 time iterations, though the scores leveled out within
20 iterations. The simulated results of the SMC before and after PSO tuning are in Figure 8.

## Page 13

Drones 2023, 7, 328
13 of 41
Figure 8. Simulated step response: before and after 100 iterations of PSO−tuning.
It is important to note that PSO is implemented here under the constrains imposed
by stability theory. Therefore, only stabilizing PSO parameters were iterated. Ultimately,
the output of the PSO tuning provided SMC parameters that outperformed benchmark
PID controllers in most trajectory tracking experiments in time simulations. This was
comprehensively documented in our recent paper [26]. However, SMC suffered from
chattering issues and caused oscillations in the attitude in real-world experiments. The
chatter in the conﬁgured PWM values going to the motors was signiﬁcant, having a
deviation of over 20% of the entire PWM range. The response of the UAV with SMC after
the PSO tuning but before any manual ﬁne-tuning is presented in Figure 9.
The manual ﬁne-tuning adjusted the ai in the sliding surface while adjusting the ˙e gain
k6 for roll in the control law to maintain the stability condition. Then, the gain k5 on the
saturation function for roll was adjusted. The intuition for tuning the sliding surface and
related gains follows along the lines of tuning a PD controller. The inner attitude loop is
tuned ﬁrst, then the outer loop. A comparison of the SMC performance on the real UAV
before and after the ﬁne-tuning is provided in Figure 9.
The fine-tuning of the parameters improved the performance of the SMC in every axis
of motion. There was approximately a 2× reduction in position error in the Y axis, and the
maximum error in yaw was reduced from ±5 degrees to ±2 degrees. The chatter in the PWM
output was reduced, by a factor of 4, to a magnitude of 50 us in pulse width. The fine-tuning
on the physical hardware was essential to obtaining a high performance on the real UAV due
to model inaccuracies and overall less noise in the simulation versus the real world.

## Page 14

Drones 2023, 7, 328
14 of 41
Figure 9. Hover experimental results: before and after manual ﬁne−tuning.
4. Experimental Results
4.1. Experimental Setup
The experiments were conducted in a narrow, closed, and turbulent space, as shown in
Figures 2 and 10. The testing ﬁeld was built out of transparent acrylic sheets. The chamber
had a length of 2.15 m, width of 2.20 m, and height of 2.30 m. Three cameras were located
along each of the NED axes. The stationary wind source (location marked in Figure 10) was
turned on before the ﬂight and turned off after the ﬂight. The thrust produced by the fan
could be adjusted by a remote controller (RC). Rag strips were attached around the edges of
the wind source in order to illustrate the wind. The indoor navigation was achieved by the
onboard realistic states measurement system consisting of a visual inertial odometry (VIO)
system and three redundant inertial measurement units (IMU). In addition, to validate the
data from the onboard sensors, the position and trajectory of the UAV was also recorded by
three external, ﬁxed high-resolution depth cameras.
As the UAV changes its attitude frequently during the ﬂight, winds with dynamic
amplitude and changing direction generated by UAV motors combined with a stationary
wind source tend to create turbulent airﬂow in a small, enclosed room. The inertial wind
forces dominate over the viscous forces, especially at relatively low altitudes (under 1 m)
or near the walls. Based on our measurements, the ratio of the length of the UAV to the
length of the cage is around 0.25, which means even when the UAV is located at the center
it is still easily affected by the airﬂow near the walls.
Five representative cases of experiments were designed, as shown in Figure 11. The
ﬁrst case was nominal ﬂight without intentionally added disturbances, which means the
disturbances perceived by the ﬂight controller were mainly induced by the UAV itself
(physical characteristics) as well as the diffused turbulent airﬂow within the small testing
ﬁeld, for example, the imbalance caused by varying battery positions, sensor distribution,
the vibration from the actuators, and the changing turbulent ﬂow, which depends on the
UAV’s position and speed. The second scenario was ﬂying with a suspended spherical
weight that was attached at the center of mass (CM) of the UAV. The length of the string
was 0.35 m and its weight was negligible, and the mass of the metal ball was 131.7 g. As

## Page 15

Drones 2023, 7, 328
15 of 41
shown in Figure 11b, when ﬂying, disturbance force would be decomposed into X–Y–Z
directions and the force magnitude in each axis could change due to the back and forth
swinging of the metal ball. The third scenario, which is shown in Figure 11c, was similar
to the second case except the suspended weight was attached to the end of the right-rear
landing gear; thus, this time not only were dynamic disturbance forces in X–Y–Z induced,
but also variable disturbance torques in pitch roll and yaw were generated.
Wind source
Quadcopter
Right Camera
Front camera
Figure 10. Testing ﬁeld located in a narrow, closed, transparent space, with three ﬁxed cameras (top,
right, front) and a stationary point wind source.
a. Nominal
b. Hanging 
Weight(CM)
c. Hanging 
Weight(OFFSET)
d. Wind
e. Wind & Hanging Weight(CM)
Figure 11. Experimental scenarios: (a) nominal ﬂight; (b) mounting a hanging weight (CM) at the
center of mass of the UAV; (c) mounting a hanging weight (OFFSET) at the end of the right-rear leg
of the quadcopter; (d) adding wind in front of the UAV; (e) adding wind together with the hanging
weight (CM).
Due to the uncertainty of the real-world environment, such as unpredictable wind
gusts, variable weather conditions, and so on, a series of comprehensive wind experiments
are necessary in developing a new, reliable, robust ﬂight controller, as shown in Figure 11d,e.
The fourth scenario was to hold the position under a unidirectional wind. This was also
regarded as the wind-only case since no extra disturbance was added except the wind.

## Page 16

Drones 2023, 7, 328
16 of 41
From the 3D environment diagram in Figure 2, the wind was produced directly in front
of the UAV. The maximum wind speed at the position of the UAV was 9 m/s. Since the
wind tends to spread and disperse over a range, the effective distance of the lateral wind
would be limited, and the magnitude and direction of the wind depends on the ﬂight
position of the UAV. The ﬁfth case of experiments, shown on the bottom-right of Figure 11e,
was an extension of the wind-only experiment, and the UAV was loaded with a spherical
suspended weight.
4.2. SMC Performance Analysis
The SMC was subject to step inputs in the X, Y, Z, and Yaw axes in four separate
experiments to evaluate the error dynamics of the controller. Plots of the velocity error ˙e
against the position error e with the s = 0 hypersurface included on the graph are described
throughout this section. In the X axis, a step input of 0.5 m was applied. The response can
be seen in Figure 12.
Figure 12. Sliding surface for X−trajectory step tracking. Color code indicates time (s).
The error exhibits both the reaching and sliding phases, as expected. In the reaching
phase, the velocity only reaches 0.5 m/s, producing a ﬂat reaching mode response, and
the sliding mode is achieved as the controller drives the error to 0 (see Figure 12). The Y
axis was also subject to a 0.5 m step input. The error dynamics performed very similarly to
the X controller, as shown in Figure 13. The slow reaching mode dynamics of the X and Y
controllers is because of the nested-loop controller structure. That is, the X and Y responses
are subject to the pitch and roll dynamics. Figures 14 and 15 show the pitch and roll sliding
modes during the respective X and Y step inputs. The pitch and roll error dynamics very
quickly pass through the reaching mode and enter the sliding mode, which is what causes
the ﬂat reaching mode curves in X and Y.
The Z axis was subject to a 0.3 m altitude step input. As shown in Figure 16, the
reaching mode overshoots the sliding surface but then smoothly re-approaches it while
entering the sliding mode. This relatively smooth oscillation about the sliding surface is
allowed by the saturation function. If the saturation function were not used, the sliding
mode would be achieved faster, but there would almost certainly be chatter about the
sliding surface at the transition from the reaching mode to the sliding mode.

## Page 17

Drones 2023, 7, 328
17 of 41
Figure 13. Sliding surface for Y−trajectory step tracking. Color code indicates time (s).
Figure 14. Sliding surface for pitch during the X−step response. Color code indicates time (s).
Figure 15. Sliding surface for roll during Y−step response. Color code indicates time (s).

## Page 18

Drones 2023, 7, 328
18 of 41
Finally, the yaw was subject to a 90 degrees clockwise step rotation (Figure 17). Simi-
larly to the Z error dynamics, without the saturation function the transition from reaching
mode to sliding mode would occur sooner. Instead, there is some undershoot of the sliding
surface initially, then a smooth convergence towards the sliding surface. The yaw motion
here may be a bit conservative, but due to the coupling of the attitude dynamics, this is
required for a smooth system response. More aggressive yaw control introduces chatter
into all of the attitude control variable outputs, which propagates through the system.
Figure 16. Sliding surface for Z−trajectory step tracking. Color code indicates time (s).
Figure 17. Sliding surface for Yaw−trajectory step tracking. Color code indicates time (s).
All of the axes subject to step inputs following the conventional reaching mode to
sliding mode error dynamics, as expected. The X and Y response is limited by the attitude
dynamics. The Z controller overshoots the sliding surface slightly when reaching the
sliding mode, while the yaw controller undershoots the sliding surface. The overshoot and
undershoot of the sliding surface are allowed by the use of the saturation functions on the
switching portion of the control law, instead of a more aggressive sign function.
4.3. Trajectory Tracking
The tracking performance of the SMC was tested on three different trajectories: hover-
ing, a rectangle, and a ﬁgure eight. In each trajectory, the UAV ascended to an altitude of
1 m at 0.1 m/s then performed the desired trajectory and returned to the ground at 0.1 m/s.

## Page 19

Drones 2023, 7, 328
19 of 41
For the hovering trajectory, the setpoint (0 cm, 0 cm, 100 cm, 0 deg), in X, Y, Z, and
Yaw was sent to the UAV for the entirety of the trajectory.
The rectangle was comprised of four sides with a length of 30 cm, which were traversed
in 3 s each. There was a 1 s hover at each corner of the rectangle. Yaw of 0 degrees was
maintained throughout the trajectory. The pattern was repeated twice before landing.
The ﬁgure-eight pattern had a radius of 30 cm and the UAV was commanded to face
in the direction of travel for the entirety of the trajectory. A total of four loops of the ﬁgure
eight, each 8 s in duration, were completed prior to landing.
Each of the trajectories was completed with no disturbance applied to the UAV (the
nominal case); with a weight hanging from the center of mass of the UAV (weight CM case);
and with a hanging weight offset under one of the motors (weight offset case). In addition
to these disturbances, for the hover trajectory, the UAV was subject to a wind disturbance
along the −X axis. This wind disturbance was applied with no weight added to the UAV
(wind case) and with the hanging weight at the center of mass (wind and weight case).
The results are organized by trajectories through the remainder of this subsection in
the following order: hover, rectangle, ﬁgure eight. The primary quantitative metric for
comparing the performance of the controllers is the root mean square (RMS) error in each
axis. The RMS error is reported in centimeters for the translational axes and degrees for the
rotational axes.
4.3.1. Hover
The RMS error along each axis for the hover trajectory subject to each of the types of
disturbances is summarized in Table 2. As a general trend, the RMS error increased with
each experiment to the right along the table. This suggests that, as intended, the difﬁculty
of the control problem increased as more severe disturbances were added.
Table 2. Root mean square position and angular error for hover trajectory.
Nominal
Weight
Weight
Wind
Wind and
CM
Offset
Weight
X (cm)
PID
2.20
2.46
3.56
9.85
9.51
SMC
0.75
0.73
0.76
1.90
2.27
Y (cm)
PID
2.01
2.05
2.02
7.81
5.11
SMC
0.87
0.91
0.97
2.30
1.85
Z (cm)
PID
13.38
11.57
12.70
15.20
15.05
SMC
1.24
1.76
1.82
1.25
2.17
Roll (deg)
PID
1.09
1.24
1.20
1.88
1.92
SMC
1.04
1.15
1.22
2.31
1.86
Pitch (deg)
PID
0.85
1.05
1.27
2.24
1.99
SMC
0.98
1.06
1.05
1.32
1.61
Yaw (deg)
PID
2.04
2.16
2.09
6.70
4.90
SMC
0.90
0.94
0.85
2.06
1.87
In the nominal case, the SMC had an over 2× reduction in RMS error compared to
the PID for X and Y tracking. That improvement increased up to a 5–10× error reduction
when disturbances, especially wind disturbances, were added. The Z error for the SMC
was less than or around 2 cm for all experiments, regardless of the disturbance applied.
Conversely, the PID had a Z error larger than 15 cm and a higher tracking delay for all
experiments. The graphs of the experiments revealed that there was a steady-state error of
10–20 cm present for all of the PID results. The PID controller was unable to maintain the
desired altitude especially under disturbances. The yaw error was 2× better with the SMC
and relatively improved when the wind was added. However, the pitch and roll errors
were comparable between the two controllers.

## Page 20

Drones 2023, 7, 328
20 of 41
Graphs comparing the X, Y, Z, and heading tracking of the PID and SMC controllers
for the nominal case are presented in Figure 18 based on the ﬂight logs, along with overlays
of the trajectories captured by the top and side cameras in top of the ﬁgure. Similar results
could be obtained from the camera recording images or the onboard ﬂight logs that the
drift area of SMC was signiﬁcantly smaller than that of PID during hovering. From the
sensors’ data, the SMC clearly had less variance in X, Y, and yaw than the PID controller.
Additionally, there was a steady-state error of over 15 cm for the PID controller in the Z axis.
Similar trends can be seen in Figures 19 and 20, when the hanging weights were added.
The PID had a larger ﬂuctuation in yaw angle of over 5 degrees, while the SMC ﬂuctuated
less than 2 degrees.
Figure 18. Hover pattern−nominal cases (top: cameras; bottom: onboard ﬂight logs).
In Figure 19, hanging weights were attached to the center of mass or to the end of the
landing gear. The SMC was able to maintain its setpoints with or without the payloads. In
contrast, the PID had a relatively larger position and heading error, and its drift area in the
XY plane increased when an offset hanging weight was added. In addition, the suspended
payload had a signiﬁcant effect on the tracking of the PID in the Z direction. From the
results, the PID pulled up and down the UAV when the weights swung from side to side.

## Page 21

Drones 2023, 7, 328
21 of 41
Finally, the plots and overlays for the case when the wind was added are in Figure 20.
The PID was blown in the direction of the wind on several occasions (green and blue), while
the SMC was able to resist the wind disturbance and more accurately maintain the setpoint
position (red and pink). There was an oscillation in the Z axis of the PID-controlled UAV
caused by it being pushed up and down in the wind. Furthermore, the SMC-controlled
UAV ﬂuctuated less than the PID-controlled UAV in terms of heading.
Hanging Weight
Figure 19. Hover pattern−hanging weight cases (top: cameras; bottom: onboard ﬂight logs).
When hovering, the UAV should maintain its current position, heading, and altitude,
and it was designed to actively reject any externally applied disturbances, such as forces and
torques, with the help of the omnidirectional disturbance observers. In the nominal case,
Figure 21i shows nonzero disturbances of 0.75 N in the X direction, −0.2 N in the Y direction,
and −3 N in the Z direction, which remained constant throughout the experiment. These
baseline disturbances might be caused by small space turbulence, i.e., airﬂow synthesized
from forward, leftward, and downward winds. In other words, ideally, these values should
be 0 N if the UAV was located in a large open and undisturbed space. When the UAV was
on the ground, as shown in the beginning of experiments in Figure 21i(c), the force in the Z
direction shows the same magnitude as the UAV’s weight of 12.75 N but in the opposite
direction, which indicated a disarmed status without any propeller speed.
The force disturbances in the hanging weight cases should have no difference from
the nominal case except an additional downward force in the Z direction. By analyzing the
average differences between the nominal and weighted cases, we can estimate the weight of

## Page 22

Drones 2023, 7, 328
22 of 41
the payload to be ≈1 N, while the actual weight of the payload was 131.5 g (1.29 N). When
the hanging weight was mounted on the left-rear leg of the UAV, i.e., the weight-offset case
in the ﬁgure, the observer-estimated forces increased due to the additional thrust produced
to balance the torque.
Hanging Weight
Figure 20. Hover pattern−wind and weight cases (top: cameras; bottom: onboard ﬂight logs).
Finally, the magnitude of forces increased signiﬁcantly in -X and -Y after applying the
lateral wind. The force in X surged in the beginning and gradually stabilized at 0.25 N. We
estimated the wind force in X as ≈−0.5 N by calculating the steady state offsets between
the nominal case and the wind cases, and the wind force in Y was estimated as ≈−0.2 N.
Figure 21i shows the airﬂow inside the cage was blowing from north-east to south-west
with an approximated angle of ≈21 degrees. The disturbance peaks in the initial and ﬁnal
phases represented the transition into and out of the main wind ﬁeld, where the forces may
change abruptly.
The torque disturbances estimated by the observers were plotted in Figure 21ii. The
roll torque means the torque around the X axis, the pitch torque represents the torque
around the Y axis, and the yaw torque means the torque around the Z axis, respectively. In
the case of a weight offset, by comparing the differences between nominal and weighted
cases, it could be seen that the torques in pitch and roll were both ≈0.2 Nm, compared to
the actual torque (0.2278 Nm). In addition, because the hanging weight was mounted to
the right-rear leg of the UAV, both disturbances in pitch and roll should be positive in the

## Page 23

Drones 2023, 7, 328
23 of 41
NED coordinates, which was validated by the blue curves in Figure 21ii(d,e). Both nominal
and weighted cases show small yaw torques that wobbled around zero.
(i) Estimated forces
(ii) Estimated torques
Figure 21. The SMC−based actual UAV ﬂying in hover mode: (i) estimated forces (N) in X, Y, and Z
by the disturbance observer and (ii) estimated torque (Nm) in roll, pitch, and yaw by the disturbance
observer.
In the wind cases, torque disturbances had more intense oscillations in pitch and roll
due to a more frequent need of attitude correction, as shown in Figure 21ii(d,e). From
Figure 21ii(f), compared with the nominal case, a clear increase in yaw could be observed,
which indicated an increase in positive torque around the Z axis. From the force estimation
results in Figure 21i, we already know the fan was located in the north-east direction
relative to the UAV. However, the wind generated by the fan was still to the south, which
would produce a positive yaw torque around the Z axis. In fact, a misalignment of the
center of the UAV and the center curve of the wind tunnel is a common cause of yaw torque

## Page 24

Drones 2023, 7, 328
24 of 41
for the indoor aerial vehicle. This misalignment could also be veriﬁed by the north-east
wind in Figure 22.
Even though we did not have the real-time information on the actual turbulence proﬁle
around the UAV, from the disturbance observer results in Figure 21i,ii, the magnitude and
direction of the airﬂow could be estimated. As a practical application, the disturbance
observer can also be used to estimate the real-time wind direction and magnitude and
sketch the wind proﬁle. As an example, in the wind case, the horizontal force applied to
the UAV was shown on the polar plot in Figure 22. Based on the NED coordinate frame,
the UAV was located at the origin, with 0 degree corresponding to the +X and 90 degrees
representing the +Y. The wind generated by the fan was blowing in the −X direction.
The color bar is associated with the time-series of the experiment, starting from blue and
landing at yellow, where the maximum magnitude of the wind and its corresponding
direction could be retrieved after the ﬂight. From this polar map, the wind was ≈0.5 N,
blowing from the north-east towards the UAV during most of the ﬂight, with the maximum
wind occurring at the beginning and at the end.
Figure 22. Disturbance-observer-estimated wind force direction (deg) and magnitude (N) in the XY
plane.
As a short summary of the hover ﬂight experiment, the total error was calculated
according to Table 2 and by



∥epos∥2 =
q
∑i=x,y,z ∥ei∥2
∥eatt∥2 =
q
∑j=r,p,yaw ∥ej∥2
(16)
where epos denotes the total position error, eatt denotes the total attitude error, i and j
represent each degree of freedom, and x, y, z, r, p, and yaw correspond to X, Y, Z, roll,
pitch, and yaw, respectively. The RMS error distribution for a particular controller in each
case was scattered and formed a region in Figure 23, with the horizontal and vertical
coordinates indicating the position error and attitude error, respectively. In addition, to
distinguish the differences between SMC and PID, their results were displayed in different
colors and textures.

## Page 25

Drones 2023, 7, 328
25 of 41
In Figure 23, each marker denotes a different experiment. For example, comparing the
SMC with the PID under the nominal condition, the blue circle was farther from the origin
than the red circle, which indicated the PID has a larger position and attitude error than
the SMC. The colored region enclosed by each experiment has the meaning of deviation
under uncertainty, and a smaller area means better adaptation to external disturbances; in
other words, the controller adapts faster when uncertainty occurs. When a hanging weight
was mounted, the UAV tended to track poorly, with larger position and attitude errors
compared to the nominal case, although some exceptions occur; for example, when looking
at the PID weight case in Figure 23 the PID had a smaller attitude error than the SMC. In
the presence of the wind, there was no doubt that both SMC and PID had larger tracking
errors compared to their own nominal cases. In short, it was clear that SMC showed a better
tracking accuracy as well as a better disturbance rejection capacity than the PID controller.
Figure 23. Hover: position and attitude error ( _nom: nominal condition; _weight: centered hanging
weight condition; _o f f set: offset hanging weight; _ww: centered hanging weight together with the
wind; _wind: wind-only condition).
4.3.2. Rectangle
The rectangle trajectory was completed for the nominal, center of mass weight, and
offset weight cases. The RMS error from each of these experiments is summarized in Table 3
for the PID and SMC.
The SMC offered more than a 4× improvement in X and Y position tracking. Addi-
tionally, the Z tracking was improved by over 5× with the SMC versus the PID controller.
The pitch and roll performance of the SMC was slightly worse than that of the PID. Finally,
the yaw error was reduced by a factor of 2. In the yaw error plots, it can be seen that the
oscillations for the PID controller are approximately double the amplitude of the SMC yaw
oscillations (Figure 24). This 2 to 1 relationship holds regardless of the applied disturbance.
However, when a weight disturbance is added there are some spikes in the PID yaw angle
error larger than ±5 degrees, which are not present in the nominal case.

## Page 26

Drones 2023, 7, 328
26 of 41
Table 3. Root mean square position and angular error for rectangle trajectory.
Nominal
Weight CM
Weight Offset
X (cm)
PID
4.81
5.08
5.43
SMC
0.91
0.89
0.90
Y (cm)
PID
4.31
5.14
4.28
SMC
1.16
1.09
1.23
Z (cm)
PID
10.79
11.54
9.07
SMC
1.61
2.13
1.55
Roll (deg)
PID
1.28
1.36
1.43
SMC
1.78
1.74
1.82
Pitch (deg)
PID
1.07
1.25
1.17
SMC
1.96
1.97
1.99
Yaw (deg)
PID
2.03
2.54
2.63
SMC
0.99
1.07
0.91
Figure 24. Rectangle pattern—nominal weight cases (top: cameras; bottom: onboard ﬂight logs).
The XY position plots in Figure 24, as well as the captured trajectories from the
tracking cameras, show a consistent overshoot in +X with the PID after the ﬁrst side of the
rectangle is traced. This overshoot was present both with and without added disturbances
(see Figure 25). Interestingly, despite this large and consistent overshoot, the RMS error

## Page 27

Drones 2023, 7, 328
27 of 41
values in X and Y are comparable for the PID controller, suggesting that the overshoot did
not single-handedly degrade the X tracking performance.
The Z plots show a consistent undershoot in the altitude for the PID, regardless of
the applied disturbance. This result is consistent with the 10 cm undershoot seen in the
hover-trajectory tracking as well (see Figures 24 and 25).
Hanging Weight
Figure 25. Rectangle pattern—hanging weight cases (top: cameras; bottom: onboard ﬂight logs).
Figure 26i shows the estimated linear forces on the UAV, calculated by the SMC
disturbance observer. Unlike the hover case, due to the swinging pendulum motion, there
were small disturbance ﬂuctuations with respect to XY. However, the Z disturbances were
slightly larger than the nominal case due to the attached weight.
In Figure 26ii, the estimated torque disturbances are plotted. With the offset weight,
constant torque disturbances of ≈0.2 Nm can be seen in pitch and roll. There were minimal
differences in yaw disturbance between the test with the center weight and the test with
the offset weight; however, their ﬂuctuations became larger compared to the nominal case
due to the swinging pendulum.
During the rectangular trajectory tracking experiments, the PID has a larger tracking
error than the SMC, as shown in Figure 27. The overall position error reached over 6× of the
SMC, and the average attitude error was about the same; however, the deviation of attitude
error of PID was much larger than the one of SMC (about 30×). The large blue region
enclosed by three standalone experiments implies the behaviors of the PID varying under
different uncertainties. Although it had a better angle tracking in the nominal scenario,
PID’s performance reduced dramatically in the other disturbance scenarios. Again, from
the rectangular experiment results, the SMC overwhelms the PID in both tracking accuracy
and disturbance rejection.

## Page 28

Drones 2023, 7, 328
28 of 41
(i) Estimated forces
(ii) Estimated torques
Figure 26. The SMC−based actual UAV ﬂying in rectangle mode: (i): estimated forces (N) in X, Y, and
Z by the disturbance observer. (ii): estimated torque (Nm) in roll, pitch, and yaw by the disturbance
observer.
Figure 27. Rectangle: position and attitude error ( _nom: nominal condition; _weight: centered
hanging weight condition; _o f f set: offset hanging weight; _ww: centered hanging weight together
with the wind; _wind: wind-only condition).

## Page 29

Drones 2023, 7, 328
29 of 41
4.3.3. Trajectory of a Figure Eight
The ﬁgure-eight trajectory was completed for the nominal case and both hanging
weight cases. The RMS error from each of these experiments is summarized in Table 4 for
the PID and SMC (Figure 28).
Table 4. Root mean square position and angular error for a ﬁgure-eight trajectory.
Nominal
Weight CM
Weight Offset
X (cm)
PID
7.89
7.61
8.24
SMC
4.70
4.53
5.61
Y (cm)
PID
5.64
5.60
6.24
SMC
4.77
4.09
4.38
Z (cm)
PID
3.92
6.17
5.47
SMC
1.75
1.79
1.71
Roll (deg)
PID
1.57
1.68
1.56
SMC
1.44
1.71
1.49
Pitch (deg)
PID
1.46
1.69
1.89
SMC
1.27
1.31
1.44
Yaw (deg)
PID
5.85
5.69
7.53
SMC
4.78
4.67
4.57
Figure 28. Figure-eight pattern—nominal cases (top: cameras; bottom: onboard ﬂight logs).

## Page 30

Drones 2023, 7, 328
30 of 41
In the XY position tracking, the PID had around 1.2–1.5 times the RMS error of that of
SMC. The Z tracking was a little more than 2× better with the SMC. In pitch and roll, the
SMC error did not change compared to the rectangular trajectory; however, the PID error
increased slightly. The difference between the two controllers for pitch and roll tracking was,
again, not very significant. In yaw, the SMC outperformed the PID by a small margin with the
exception of the offset weight. The PID had around 2× more error in yaw tracking with the
offset weight, where the SMC’s performance did not change relative to the other cases.
In the XY position plots (Figure 29), the SMC follows a more symmetric path than the
PID. The PID has a larger circle on the second half of the trajectory, the left side, than on
the ﬁrst half. This difference is a result of the PID not returning to the origin between the
ﬁrst loop and the second loop. It overshoots the origin on the ﬁrst loop and is unable to
compensate in the second loop.
The Z tracking steady-state offset was not present in the PID controller for the ﬁgure-
eight trajectory, unlike with the other trajectories, though there was an initial height error
after takeoff that was reduced within the ﬁrst 10 s of the trajectory following. The Z
regulation was still poor compared to the SMC. The PID yaw tracking had a slight delay
and some overshoot as the direction changed.
Figure 30i shows the estimated linear force disturbances, from the SMC disturbance
observer. The reciprocal oscillations of disturbances in XY showed the aerodynamic forces
opposing the motion. As the UAV would yaw and turn, the weight would swing out
accordingly. Thus, for the offset weight case, due to a larger centrifugal force, the X and Y
disturbances grew larger, with sharper oscillations; meanwhile, Z had a larger downward
force. Because of the UAV’s aggressive ﬂight motion and rapidly changing attitude, the
offset weight could usually swing at an angle of about 30–45 deg.
Hanging Weight
Figure 29. Figure-eight pattern—hanging weight cases (top: cameras; bottom: onboard ﬂight logs).

## Page 31

Drones 2023, 7, 328
31 of 41
(i) Estimated forces
(ii) Estimated torques
Figure 30. The SMC−based actual UAV ﬂying in ﬁgure-eight mode: (i) estimated forces (N) in
X, Y, and Z by the disturbance observer; (ii) estimated torque (Nm) in roll, pitch, and yaw by the
disturbance observer.
The pitch and roll disturbances in Figure 30ii show constant torque offsets of ≈0.2 Nm for
the offset weight case, similarly to the rectangle and hover trajectories (Figures 21ii and 26ii).
The yaw disturbance had oscillations, which were caused by a larger aerodynamic moment as
the UAV followed the figure-eight yaw setpoints (Figure 30ii(f)).
As for the complex ﬁgure-eight pattern tracking test, the UAV was commanded to
change position and attitude all the time. Both the SMC and the PID have larger position
and attitude errors in this case. For the ﬁgure-eight nominal case, the PID had 1.5× position
error and more than 1.2× attitude error than that of SMC (Figure 31). For the CM weight
case, the PID had 1.8× position error and more than 1.2× attitude error than that of SMC.
For the offset weight case, the PID had 1.6× position error and more than 1.5× attitude
error than that of SMC. Overall, SMC had a better performance than the PID in this case.

## Page 32

Drones 2023, 7, 328
32 of 41
Figure 31. Figure eight: position and attitude error ( _nom: nominal condition; _weight: centered
hanging weight condition; _o f f set: offset hanging weight; _ww: centered hanging weight together
with the wind; _wind: wind-only condition).
5. Conclusions and Future Work
In this work, a 6-degrees-of-freedom sliding mode controller was designed for a UAV
to operate in real-world scenarios. A simulated UAV was developed ﬁrst for roughly tuning
the control parameters using a PSO algorithm, followed by a manual ﬁne-tuning process
on the actual UAV. The proposed controller was tested in an enclosed and turbulent space,
where it showed a better tracking accuracy and higher robustness than PID, especially
under severe disturbances, such as loads, torques, and wind.
The SMC controller outperformed an industry-standard PID controller across a variety
of tests. When subject to disturbances while following complex trajectories, the SMC
responded faster and more precisely, thanks to its disturbance observers, and always main-
tained an RMS positional error below 10 cm. The SMC had more than a 2× improvement
over a PID controller in position tracking across a variety of trajectories under nominal
conditions, with more than a 5× improvement under severe disturbances.
In future work, a second-order sliding mode controller could be used to reduce
chattering from the controller and reduce the susceptibility to noise. This would especially
improve the attitude control. Another possible direction would be to create an online tuning
process, potentially using neural networks, instead of relying on a manual ﬁne-tuning
process. These results can further be combined with obstacle avoidance algorithms that
can serve to generate real-time safe trajectories along which the drone should navigate.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, R.S. and J.M.-L.; methodology, Y.J., A.M., R.S. and J.M.-L.;
software, Y.J. and A.M.; validation, Y.J. and A.M.; formal analysis, Y.J. and A.M.; investigation, Y.J. and
A.M.; resources, R.S. and J.M.-L.; data curation, Y.J. and A.M.; writing—original draft preparation,
Y.J. and A.M.; writing—review and editing, R.S. and J.M.-L.; visualization, Y.J.; supervision, R.S. and
J.M.-L.; project administration, R.S. and J.M.-L.; funding acquisition, R.S. and J.M.-L. All authors have
read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Acknowledgments: The authors would also like to thank Weite Zhang, Chang, Liu, Xu Mao, and Yi
Huang for their help in the simulations and experiments.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

## Page 33

Drones 2023, 7, 328
33 of 41
Appendix A
Appendix A.1. X and Y Controllers
For the completeness of the work, here we summarize from [26] the SMC design
supported by stability theory. The designs of the X and Y controllers are very similar, so
the derivation of the X controller is presented in detail and the Y controller result will be
shown by analogy. We have the following deﬁnition for the UAV:
(
u1
= sin φ sin ψ + cos φ sin θ cos ψ
u2
= −sin φ cos ψ + cos φ sin θ sin ψ
(A1)
According to (1), (3) and (A1),
¨x = −1
m[u1 · 4Tmax · τT + K1 · ˙x · | ˙x|]
(A2)
where u1 is the control signal. Next, consider the sliding surface:
sx = a1ex + ˙ex
(A3)
where ex = x −xd, with xd as the X setpoint. Then, use Equations (A2) and (A3) and apply
the SMC design summarized in Section 3. A Lyapunov stability analysis is conducted,
using the Lyapunov function V(sx) = 1
2s2
x, whose time derivative reads as follows:
˙V(sx) = sx ˙sx = sx(a1 ˙ex + ¨ex) = sx(a1 ˙ex + ¨x −¨xd)
= sx

a1 ˙ex −1
m(u1 · 4TmaxτT + K1 · ˙x · | ˙x|) −¨xd

= sx[a1 ˙ex −(k′
1sat(sx
ϵ ) + k2 ˙ex + csx −¨xd
−K1 · ˙x · | ˙x| · +K1 · ˙x · | ˙x|) −¨xd]
= sx
h
(a1 −k2) ˙ex −

k′
1sat(sx
ϵ ) + csx
i
(A4)
From Equation (A4),





a1 −k2 = 0
k′
1 > 0
c > 0
(A5)
are sufﬁcient conditions to ensure stability with ˙V(sx) < 0, where k′
1, c, and k2 represent E1,
E2, and E3 in Section 3, respectively. Following the same procedures in Section 3, we obtain
the control law as follows:
u1 =
1
4TmaxτT
[m

k′
1sat(sx
ϵ ) + k2 ˙ex + csx −¨xd

−K1 · ˙x · | ˙x|]
(A6)
where +cs is an additional control term used on the X and Y controllers, and k′
1 is a variable
gain that reduces large position errors quickly without causing instability for small position
errors:
k′
1 =
(
k1,
(b1 · |e| + b2 · | ˙e|) < k1
(b1 · |e| + b2 · | ˙e|),
(b1 · |e| + b2 · | ˙e|) ≥k1
where b1 and b2 are tunable constants.

## Page 34

Drones 2023, 7, 328
34 of 41
Following by analogy, and considering the same stability conditions given by (A5),
the Y control law is given by the following:
u2 =
1
4TmaxτT
[m

k′
1sat(sy
ϵ ) + k2 ˙ey + csy −¨yd

−K1 · ˙y · | ˙y|]
(A7)
With u1 and u2 given in (A6) and (A7), recall (A1) we can solve for φ and θ to retrieve
the roll and pitch setpoints for the attitude controller:
(
φdes
= arcsin(u1 sin ψ −u2 cos ψ)
θdes
= arcsin
 u1 cos ψ + u2 sin ψ
cos φ

(A8)
Appendix A.2. Altitude Controller
For the Z controller, start with the Z equation from (1), (3)
¨z = −1
m[(cos φ cos θ) · 4Tmax · τT + K1 · ˙z · | ˙z|] + g
(A9)
and let the sliding surface be the following:
sz = a2e + ˙e
(A10)
The stability analysis follows similarly to X with a Lyapunov function of V(sz) = 1
2s2
z,
whose time derivative reads as follows:
˙V(sz) = sz ˙sz = sz[a2 ˙ez + ¨ez]
= sz[(a2 −4Tmax
m
k4) ˙ez
−(k′
3
4Tmax(cos φ cos θ)
m
sat(sz
ϵ ))]
(A11)
Then, the sufﬁcient conditions for achieving ˙V(sz) < 0 become the following:
(
a2 −4Tmax
m
k4 = 0
k′
3 > 0
(A12)
where k′
3 and k4 are in the form of E1 and E3 in Section 3, respectively, and k′
3 is deﬁned
similar to k′
1 in the X and Y controllers:
k′
3 =
(
k3,
(b3 · |e| + b4 · | ˙e|) < k3
(b3 · |e| + b4 · | ˙e|),
(b3 · |e| + b4 · | ˙e|) ≥k3
Then, following the SMC design summarized in Section 3, rewrite (A9) and (A10) in
the form of τT:
τT = k′
3sat
sz
ϵ

+
k4
cos θ cos φ ˙ez
+ −K1 · ˙z · | ˙z| + mg −m¨zd
4Tmax cos φ cos θ
(A13)
Appendix A.3. Attitude Controllers
The design of the attitude control laws was similar to the design of the altitude
controller. The primary difference is that there is a coupling between the τ variables. For

## Page 35

Drones 2023, 7, 328
35 of 41
example, τRoll controller depends on τPitch and τYaw. This coupling will be resolved at the
end of Appendix A after the attitude control laws are derived.
In the design of the roll controller, an expression for ¨φ needs to be obtained. By
differentiating the ˙φ equation from (1), the following is obtained:
¨φ = −2
√
2 · l · Tmax
Jx
τR −2
√
2 · l · Tmax · tan θ sin φ
Jy
τP
+ 4Qmax tan θ cos φ
Jz
τY + fφ
(A14)
where fφ
fφ =q · (
1
cos2 θ · ˙θ · sin φ + tan θ cos φ · ˙φ)
+ r · (
1
cos2 θ · ˙θ · cos φ −tan θ sin φ · ˙φ)
−Jz −Jy
Jx
· qr −K2
Jx
· p · |p| −Jx −Jz
Jy
·
pr · tan θ sin φ −K2
Jy
· q · |q| · tan θ sin φ
−Jy −Jx
Jz
· pq · tan θ cos φ
−K2
Jz
· r · |r| · tan θ cos φ
(A15)
Next, the sliding surface is selected:
sφ = a3eφ + ˙eφ
(A16)
Similarly to the altitude controller, the control law becomes
τR =k5 · sat(sφ
ϵ ) + k6 · ˙eφ −Jx
Jy
· tan θ sin φ · τP
+ 4Jx · Qmax · tan θ cos φ
2
√
2Jz · l · Tmax
· τY
+
Jx
2
√
2 · l · Tmax
· ( fφ −¨φdes)
(A17)
Then, the Lyapunov stability condition can be calculated using the Lyapunov function
V(sφ) = s2
φ, and, imposing ˙V(sφ) < 0, we have the following:
˙V(sφ) = sφ ˙sφ = sφ(a3 ˙eφ + ¨φ −¨φdes)
= sφ[(a3 −2
√
2 · l · Tmax
Jx
· k6) ˙eφ
−2
√
2 · l · Tmax
Jx
· k5 · sat(sφ
ϵ )]
(A18)
Sufﬁcient conditions for roll stability become the following:
(
a3 −2
√
2Tmaxl
Jx
k6 = 0
k5 > 0
(A19)

## Page 36

Drones 2023, 7, 328
36 of 41
Through analogy with the roll controller, the pitch controller is found to be
τP =
1
cos φ · k5 · sat(sθ
ϵ ) +
k6
cos φ · ˙eθ −4Jy · Qmax · tan φ
2
√
2Jz · l · Tmax
· τY +
Jy
cos φ · 2
√
2 · l · Tmax
· ( fθ −¨θdes)
(A20)
where fθ
fθ = −(q · sin φ · ˙φ + r · cos φ · ˙φ
+ Jx −Jz
Jy
· pr · cos φ + K2
Jy
· q · |q| · cos φ)
+ Jy −Jx
Jz
· pq · sin φ + K2
Jz
· r · |r| · sin φ
(A21)
and the stability condition is also given by (A19). The yaw sliding surface is selected next,
as in (A22).
sψ = a4eψ + ˙eψ
(A22)
Then, through the same method as for the pitch and roll controller derivation, the yaw
control law becomes
τY = −cos θ
cos φ · k7 · sat(sψ
ϵ ) −k8 · cos θ
cos φ · ˙eψ
+ 2
√
2Jz · l · Tmax · tan φ
4Jy · Qmax
· τP
−
Jz · cos θ
4 · Qmax · cos φ · ( fψ −¨ψdes)
(A23)
where
fψ =q · cos φ cos θ · ˙φ + sin φ sin θ · ˙θ
cos2 θ
+ r · −sin φ cos θ · ˙φ + cos φ sin θ · ˙θ
cos2 θ
−cos φ(Jy −Jx)
cos θ · Jz
· pq −cos φ · K2
cos θ · Jz
· r · |r|
−sin φ(Jx −Jz)
cos θ · Jy
· pr −sin φ · K2
cos θ · Jy
· q · |q|
(A24)
Finally, using a Lyapunov function of V(sψ) = s2
ψ and obtaining its time derivative,
˙V(s) = sψ ˙sψ = sψ(a4 ˙eψ + ¨ψ −¨ψdes)
= sψ[(a4 −4Qmax
Jz
· k8) ˙eψ
−cos φ · 4Qmax
cos θ · Jz
· k7 · sat(sψ
ϵ )]
(A25)
The yaw stability conditions are found to be the following:
(
a4 −4Qmax
Jz
· k8 = 0
k7 > 0
(A26)

## Page 37

Drones 2023, 7, 328
37 of 41
satisfying ˙V(sφ) < 0.
As mentioned, the attitude control laws (A17), (A20), (A23) are all coupled. The
coupling of these control terms is linear, so these equations form a linear system of equations
Aτ = B. Then, the control variables are given by the solution τ = A−1B. The expressions
for A, B, and τ are as follows:
A =


1
Jx
Jy · tan θ sin φ
−4Jx·Qmax·tan θ cos φ
2
√
2Jz·l·Tmax
0
1
4Jy·Qmax·tan φ
2
√
2Jz·l·Tmax
0
−2
√
2Jz·l·Tmax·tan φ
4Jy·Qmax
1


(A27)
B =


k5 · sat( sφ
ϵ ) + k6 · ˙eφ +
Jx
2
√
2·l·Tmax · ( fφ −¨φdes)
1
cos φ · k5 · sat( sθ
ϵ ) +
k6
cos φ · ˙eθ +
Jy
cos φ·2
√
2·l·Tmax
·( fθ −¨θdes)
cos θ
cos φ · −k7 · sat( sψ
ϵ ) −k8 · cos θ
cos φ · ˙eψ
−
Jz·cos θ
4·Qmax·cos φ · ( fψ −¨ψdes)


(A28)
τ =


τR
τP
τY


(A29)
Appendix A.4. Disturbance Observer
From the UAV model in Figure 3, each propeller generates thrust in the −z′ direction. The
real thrust factor for each propeller is denoted as uri = (PWMri −PWMmin)/(PWMmax −
PWMmin), and uri ∈[0, 1], which is used to calculate the actual τr:
τTr = ur1 + ur2 + ur3 + ur4
4
τRr = ur2 + ur3 −ur1 −ur4
4
τPr = ur1 + ur3 −ur2 −ur4
4
τYr = ur1 + ur2 −ur3 −ur4
4
(A30)
These τr values are then fed back into the disturbance observers to construct the ﬁnal
control laws, as explained next. From [50], the disturbance observer is designed to drive
the state tracking error asymptotically to zero in the presence of constant force and torque
disturbances. The constant force disturbances are represented by d f = [d fx, d fy, d fz] in
X–Y–Z directions, respectively, and constant torque disturbances dt = [dtx, dty, dtz] around
X–Y–Z axes, respectively.
Unlike the design in [50], which only concerns a three-dimensional force disturbance
observer and was only tested in simulations, the proposed method uses a six-dimensional
disturbance observer including forces and torques and is tested in UAV experiments.
Similar to [50], each observer error dynamic is decoupled from the rest of the loop.
First, the state variables v and w are deﬁned as [ ˙x, ˙y, ˙z] and [p, q, r], respectively, where
˙v =


−1
m[u1 · 4Tmax · τTr + K1 · ˙x · | ˙x|]
−1
m[u2 · 4Tmax · τTr + K1 · ˙y · | ˙y|]
−1
m[(cos φ cos θ) · 4Tmax · τTr + K1 · ˙z · | ˙z|] + g


(A31)

## Page 38

Drones 2023, 7, 328
38 of 41
˙w =


1
Jx [2
√
2l · Tmax · τRr −q · r(Jz −Jy) −K2 · p · |p|]
1
Jy [2
√
2l · Tmax · τPr −p · r(Jx −Jz) −K2 · q · |q|]
1
Jz [4Qmax · τYr −p · q(Jy −Jx) −K2 · r · |r|]


(A32)
where τTr, τPr, τRr, and τYr are the actual feedback thrust factors calculated by the actuator
speed measurement factors ur. To estimate disturbance acceleration d f in X–Y–Z directions,
we consider the observer structure
( ˆd f = z f + k f · vr
˙z f = −k f · ˆd f −k f · ˙v
(A33)
where vr is the actual velocity after disturbances ˙vr = ˙v + d f . With the error of disturbance
deﬁned as e = d f −ˆd f , the error dynamics become
˙e = ˙d f −˙ˆd f = ˙d f −˙z f −k f ˙vr
= −k f · e + ˙d f
(A34)
Assuming that d f changes slowly compared to the tracking dynamics, then at any
instant it can be approximated by a constant, meaning ˙d f ≈0. Under this assumption, the
error dynamics become
˙e = −k f · e
(A35)
which is globally exponentially stable for k f > 0. Here, k f = 5 is selected in the experiments.
To estimate the disturbance in angular acceleration dt around X–Y–Z axes, a similar
observer structure is considered:
( ˆdt = zt + kt · wr
˙zt = −kt · ˆdt −kt · ˙w
(A36)
where wr is the actual angular velocity after applying disturbances and ˙wr = ˙w + dt. With
the error of disturbance deﬁned as e∗= dt −ˆdt, the error dynamics become
˙e∗= ˙dt −˙ˆdt = ˙dt −˙zt −kt ˙wr
= −kt · e∗+ ˙dt
(A37)
Again, assuming dt changes slowly, which means ˙dt ≈0, the error dynamics become
˙e∗= −kt · e∗
(A38)
which is globally exponentially stable for kt > 0. The larger kt > 0 is, the faster the distur-
bances observer converges. In this study, we chose kt = 5. The disturbance terms ( ˆd f , ˆdt)
can thus be added into the system dynamics to compensate the constant disturbances.

## Page 39

Drones 2023, 7, 328
39 of 41
Referring to Equations (A6), (A7), (A13), (A17), (A20), (A23), (A33), and (A36), we add
the estimated disturbances terms in the control laws, which ultimately read as follows:























u′
1 = u1 + ˆd fx ·
m
4Tmax·τTr
u′
2 = u2 + ˆd fy ·
m
4Tmax·τTr
τ′
T = τT + ˆd fz ·
m
4·Tmax cos θ cos φ
τ′
R = τR + ˆdtx ·
Jx
Tmax·2
√
2·l
τ′
P = τP + ˆdty ·
Jy
Tmax·2
√
2·l
τ′
Y = τY + ˆdtz ·
Jz
4·Qmax
(A39)
References
1.
Samouh, F.; Gluza, V.; Djavadian, S.; Meshkani, S.; Farooq, B. Multimodal Autonomous Last-Mile Delivery System Design and
Application. In Proceedings of the 2020 IEEE International Smart Cities Conference (ISC2), Piscataway, NJ, USA, 28 September–1
October 2020; pp. 1–7.
2.
Guerrero, J.A.; Bestaoui, Y. UAV path planning for structure inspection in windy environments. J. Intell. Robot. Syst. 2013,
69, 297–311. [CrossRef]
3.
Flener, C.; Vaaja, M.; Jaakkola, A.; Krooks, A.; Kaartinen, H.; Kukko, A.; Kasvi, E.; Hyyppä, H.; Hyyppä, J.; Alho, P. Seamless
mapping of river channels at high resolution using mobile LiDAR and UAV-photography. Remote Sens. 2013, 5, 6382–6407.
[CrossRef]
4.
Adão, T.; Hruška, J.; Pádua, L.; Bessa, J.; Peres, E.; Morais, R.; Sousa, J.J. Hyperspectral imaging: A review on UAV-based sensors,
data processing and applications for agriculture and forestry. Remote Sens. 2017, 9, 1110. [CrossRef]
5.
Mohd Daud, S.M.S.; Mohd Yusof, M.Y.P.; Heo, C.C.; Khoo, L.S.; Chainchel Singh, M.K.; Mahmood, M.S.; Nawawi, H. Applications
of drone in disaster management: A scoping review. Sci. Justice 2022, 62, 30–42. [PubMed]
6.
Erdos, D.; Erdos, A.; Watkins, S.E. An experimental UAV system for search and rescue challenge. IEEE Aerosp. Electron. Syst.
Mag. 2013, 28, 32–37. [CrossRef]
7.
Naidoo, Y.; Stopforth, R.; Bright, G. Development of an UAV for search rescue applications. In Proceedings of the IEEE Africon
’11, Victoria Falls, Zambia, 13–15 September 2011; pp. 1–6. [CrossRef]
8.
Obermeyer, K.; Oberlin, P.; Darbha, S. Sampling-based roadmap methods for a visual reconnaissance UAV. In Proceedings of the
AIAA Guidance, Navigation, and Control Conference, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2–5 August 2010; p. 7568.
9.
Samaras, S.; Diamantidou, E.; Ataloglou, D.; Sakellariou, N.; Vafeiadis, A.; Magoulianitis, V.; Lalas, A.; Dimou, A.; Zarpalas, D.;
Votis, K.; et al. Deep learning on multi sensor data for counter UAV applications—A systematic review. Sensors 2019, 19, 4837.
[CrossRef]
10.
Agbeyangi, A.O.; Odiete, J.O.; Olorunlomerue, A.B. Review on UAVs used for aerial surveillance. J. Multidiscip. Eng. Sci. Technol.
2016, 3, 5713–5719.
11.
Lim, H.; Park, J.M.; Lee, D.; Kim, H.J. Build Your Own Quadrotor: Open-Source Projects on Unmanned Aerial Vehicles.
IEEE Robot. Autom. Mag. 2012, 19, 33–45. [CrossRef]
12.
Goel, A.; Salim, A.M.; Ansari, A.; Ravela, S.; Bernstein, D. Adaptive digital PID control of a quadcopter with unknown dynamics.
arXiv 2020, arXiv:2006.00416.
13.
Dong, J.; He, B. Novel fuzzy PID-type iterative learning control for quadrotor UAV. Sensors 2019, 19, 24. [CrossRef]
14.
Zhou, J.; Deng, R.; Shi, Z.; Zhong, Y. Robust cascade PID attitude control of quadrotor helicopters subject to wind disturbance. In
Proceedings of the 2017 36th Chinese Control Conference (CCC), Dalian, China, 26–28 July 2017; pp. 6558–6563.
15.
Park, D.; Yu, H.; Xuan-Mung, N.; Lee, J.; Hong, S.K. Multicopter PID Attitude Controller Gain Auto-tuning through Reinforcement
Learning Neural Networks. In Proceedings of the 2019 2nd International Conference on Control and Robot Technology, Jeju,
Republic of Korea, 12–14 December 2019; pp. 80–84.
16.
Mo, H.; Farid, G. Nonlinear and Adaptive Intelligent Control Techniques for Quadrotor UAV—A Survey. Asian J. Control 2017,
21, 989–1008. [CrossRef]
17.
Ru, P.; Subbarao, K. Nonlinear model predictive control for unmanned aerial vehicles. Aerospace 2017, 4, 31. [CrossRef]
18.
Ha, C.; Zuo, Z.; Choi, F.B.; Lee, D. Passivity-based adaptive backstepping control of quadrotor-type UAVs. Robot. Auton. Syst.
2014, 62, 1305–1315. [CrossRef]
19.
Fang, Z.; Gao, W. Adaptive backstepping control of an indoor micro-quadrotor. Res. J. Appl. Sci. Eng. Technol. 2012, 4, 4216–4226.
20.
Zhao, B.; Xian, B.; Zhang, Y.; Zhang, X. Nonlinear robust sliding mode control of a quadrotor unmanned aerial vehicle based on
immersion and invariance method. Int. J. Robust Nonlinear Control 2015, 25, 3714–3731. [CrossRef]
21.
Besnard, L.; Shtessel, Y.B.; Landrum, B. Quadrotor vehicle control via sliding mode controller driven by sliding mode disturbance
observer. J. Frankl. Inst. 2012, 349, 658–684. [CrossRef]

## Page 40

Drones 2023, 7, 328
40 of 41
22.
Guruganesh, R.; Bandyopadhyay, B.; Arya, H.; Singh, G. Design and hardware implementation of autopilot control laws for MAV
using super twisting control. J. Intell. Robot. Syst. 2018, 90, 455–471. [CrossRef]
23.
Zheng, E.H.; Xiong, J.J.; Luo, J.L. Second order sliding mode control for a quadrotor UAV. ISA Trans. 2014, 53, 1350–1356.
[CrossRef]
24.
Gong, X.; Hou, Z.C.; Zhao, C.J.; Bai, Y.; Tian, Y.T. Adaptive backstepping sliding mode trajectory tracking control for a quad-rotor.
Int. J. Autom. Comput. 2012, 9, 555–560. [CrossRef]
25.
Noordin, A.; Basri, A.; Mohamed, Z.; Zainal Abidin, A.F. Modelling and PSO ﬁne-tuned PID control of quadrotor UAV. Int. J.
Adv. Sci. Eng. Inf. Technol. 2017, 7, 1367. [CrossRef]
26.
Jing, Y.; Wang, X.; Heredia-Juesas, J.; Fortner, C.; Giacomo, C.; Sipahi, R.; Martinez-Lorenzo, J. PX4 Simulation Results of a
Quadcopter with a Disturbance-Observer-Based and PSO-Optimized Sliding Mode Surface Controller. Drones 2022, 6, 261.
[CrossRef]
27.
Boubertakh, H. Optimal Stabilization of A Quadrotor UAV by a Constrained Fuzzy Control and PSO. MATEC Web Conf. 2017,
99, 03001. [CrossRef]
28.
Kennedy, J.; Eberhart, R. Particle swarm optimization. In Proceedings of the ICNN’95–International Conference on Neural
Networks, Perth, WA, Australia, 27 November– 1 December 1995; Volume 4, pp. 1942–1948. [CrossRef]
29.
Spitzer, A.; Michael, N. Rotational Error Metrics for Quadrotor Control. arXiv 2020, arXiv:cs.RO/2011.11909.
30.
Abdelmaksoud, S.I.; Mailah, M.; Abdallah, A.M. Control strategies and novel techniques for autonomous rotorcraft unmanned
aerial vehicles: A review. IEEE Access 2020, 8, 195142–195169. [CrossRef]
31.
Mueller, M.W. Multicopter attitude control for recovery from large disturbances. arXiv 2018, arXiv:cs.RO/1802.09143.
32.
Alaimo, A.; Artale, V.; Milazzo, C.; Ricciardello, A. Comparison between Euler and quaternion parametrization in UAV dynamics.
Aip Conf. Proc. 2013, 1558, 1228–1231.
33.
Jing, Y.; Zhihao, C.; Wang, Y. Modeling of The Quadrotor UAV Based on Screw Theory via Dual Quaternion. In Proceedings of
the AIAA Modeling and Simulation Technologies (MST) Conference, Boston, MA, USA, 19–22 August 2013; p. 4594.
34.
Kehlenbeck, A. Quaternion-based control for aggressive trajectory tracking with a micro-quadrotor UAV. Ph.D. Thesis, University
of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA, 2014.
35.
Kahouadji, M.; Choukchou-Braham, A.; Mokhtari, M.; Cherki, B. Super twisting control for attitude tracking using quaternion.
PET 2018, 36, 35–39.
36.
Chen, F.; Jiang, R.; Zhang, K.; Jiang, B.; Tao, G. Robust Backstepping Sliding-Mode Control and Observer-Based Fault Estimation
for a Quadrotor UAV. IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. 2016, 63, 5044–5056. [CrossRef]
37.
Xiong, J.J.; Zheng, E.H. Position and attitude tracking control for a quadrotor UAV. ISA Trans. 2014, 53, 725–731. [CrossRef]
38.
Shi, X.; Cheng, Y.; Yin, C.; Shi, H.; Huang, X. Actuator fault tolerant controlling using adaptive radical basis function neural
network SMC for quadrotor UAV. In Proceedings of the 2019 Chinese Control And Decision Conference (CCDC), Nanchang,
China, 3–5 June 2019; pp. 5409–5414. [CrossRef]
39.
Merheb, A.R.; Noura, H.; Bateman, F. Passive fault tolerant control of quadrotor UAV using regular and cascaded Sliding Mode
Control. In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Control and Fault-Tolerant Systems (SysTol), Nice, France, 9–11 October 2013;
pp. 330–335. [CrossRef]
40.
Moﬁd, O.; Mobayen, S.; Wong, W.K. Adaptive Terminal Sliding Mode Control for Attitude and Position Tracking Control of
Quadrotor UAVs in the Existence of External Disturbance. IEEE Access 2021, 9, 3428–3440. [CrossRef]
41.
Rosales, C.; Gimenez, J.; Rossomando, F.; Soria, C.; Sarcinelli-Filho, M.; Carelli, R. UAVs Formation Control With Dynamic
Compensation Using Neuro Adaptive SMC. In Proceedings of the 2019 International Conference on Unmanned Aircraft Systems
(ICUAS), Atlanta, GA, USA, 11–14 June 2019; pp. 93–99. [CrossRef]
42.
Zhou, F.; Zhou, Y.J.; Jiang, G.P.; Cao, N. Adaptive tracking control of quadrotor UAV system with input constraints.
In
Proceedings of the 2018 Chinese Control And Decision Conference (CCDC), Shenyang, China, 9–11 June 2018; pp. 5774–5779.
[CrossRef]
43.
Eltayeb, A.; Rahmat, M.F.; Basri, M.A.M.; Eltoum, M.A.M.; El-Ferik, S. An Improved Design of an Adaptive Sliding Mode
Controller for Chattering Attenuation and Trajectory Tracking of the Quadcopter UAV. IEEE Access 2020, 8, 205968–205979.
[CrossRef]
44.
Abro, G.E.M.; Zulkiﬂi, S.A.B.; Asirvadam, V.S.; Ali, Z.A. Model-free-based single-dimension fuzzy SMC design for underactuated
quadrotor UAV. Actuators 2021, 10, 191. [CrossRef]
45.
Zheng, E.; Xiong, J. Quad-rotor unmanned helicopter control via novel robust terminal sliding mode controller and under-actuated
system sliding mode controller. Optik 2014, 125, 2817–2825. [CrossRef]
46.
Beard, R.W. Quadrotor dynamics and control. Brigh. Young Univ. 2008, 19, 46–56.
47.
Suleiman, H.U.; Mu’azu, M.B.; Zarma, T.A.; Salawudeen, A.T.; Thomas, S.; Galadima, A.A. Methods of Chattering Reduction in
Sliding Mode Control: A Case Study of Ball and Plate System. In Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE 7th International Conference on
Adaptive Science Technology (ICAST), Accra, Ghana, 22–24 August 2018; pp. 1–8. [CrossRef]
48.
Guldner, J.; Utkin, V. The chattering problem in sliding mode systems. In MTNS2000 Mathematical Theory of Networks and Systems;
Universite de Perpignan: Perpignan, France, 2000.

## Page 41

Drones 2023, 7, 328
41 of 41
49.
Nobile, M.S.; Cazzaniga, P.; Besozzi, D.; Colombo, R.; Mauri, G.; Pasi, G. Fuzzy Self-Tuning PSO: A settings-free algorithm for
global optimization. Swarm Evol. Comput. 2018, 39, 70–85. [CrossRef]
50.
Moeini, A.; Raﬁque, M.A.; Xue, Z.; Lynch, A.F.; Zhao, Q. Disturbance Observer-Based Integral Backstepping Control for UAVs.
In Proceedings of the 2020 International Conference on Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS), Athens, Greece, 1–4 September
2020; pp. 382–388.
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
