# IJAM_56_3_09.pdf

## Page 1

Trajectory Tracking Control for Quadrotor UAVs
Based on a Finite-Time Extended State Observer
Yuxin Li, Yan Qi*
Abstract—This paper proposes a novel trajectory tracking
control scheme for quadrotor UAVs. The main contributions
and advantages of this work are summarized as follows: First,
a new extended state observer is designed for quadrotor UAVs,
which enables ﬁnite-time accurate estimation of disturbance
signals. Second, command ﬁltering control is adopted to avoid
the differentiation of virtual control laws and effectively re-
duce the system’s computational burden. Third, ﬁnite-time
control theory is incorporated into the controller design to
ensure the rapid response performance of the system. Finally,
numerical simulation results verify that the proposed scheme
achieves excellent control performance and exhibits strong anti-
disturbance capability.
Index Terms—quadrotor UAVs, extended state observer, com-
mand ﬁlter, ﬁnite-time control.
I. INTRODUCTION
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) have become indis-
pensable equipment in the ﬁelds of aerospace and military
reconnaissance. In particular, quadrotor UAVs are the most
widely adopted, owing to their outstanding agility and unique
vertical takeoff and landing (VTOL) capabilities. It is worth
noting that the quadrotor UAVs are underactuated, strongly
coupled, and high-order systems, making the design of high-
precision controllers a challenging task. Furthermore, the
quadrotor UAVs work at high altitudes, addressing the effects
of gust disturbances is a topic of practical signiﬁcance [1]–
[3].
Currently, there are many control schemes for the quadro-
tor UAVs, such as Proportional-Integral-Derivative (PID)
control [4], fuzzy adaptive control [5], Sliding Mode Con-
trol(SMC) [6]–[8], and backstepping control [9]–[11]. PID
control is used control scheme in early UAVs. In [4], a
fuzzy PID technique is used to obtain the optimal con-
trol parameters in real time, thereby achieving trajectory
tracking. As the demand for control precision continues to
rise, relying solely on PID control can no longer meet the
control requirements. SMC and backstepping control have
gradually developed into commonly used control methods for
quadrotor UAVs. In [6], the Neural networks are utilized to
obtain the equivalent control and the switching control values
in SMC, thereby reducing control costs. However, neural
networks have errors when approximating nonlinear func-
tions. To further reduce the chattering phenomenon, a super-
twisting SMC was designed in [7] to suppress chattering in
Manuscript received September 22, 2025; revised December 19, 2025.
This work was supported in part by the Department of Education of
Liaoning Province under Grant JIYTMS20230950.
Yuxin Li is an undergraduate student of Department of Electronic Infor-
mation, University of Science and Technology Liaoning, Anshan, 114051,
China (e-mail: 3694681873@qq.com).
Yan Qi is a lecturer of Department of Electronic Information, University
of Science and Technology Liaoning, Anshan, 114051, China (correspond-
ing author to provide phone: 15241831334, e-mail: 7623970@qq.com).
the input signals, and an adaptive law in [8] to compensate
for external disturbance signals. Nevertheless, the chattering
in SMC cannot be eliminated. In contrast, the control laws
of backstepping control is a smooth function derived based
on Lyapunov theory, which avoids the chattering problem.
In [9], the backstepping control is applied to quadrotor
UAVs which ensures the anti-noise capability of the system.
In backstepping control, the differentiation of the virtual
control law may lead to the phenomenon of differential
explosion, which is usually addressed by the dynamic surface
technique [10], [11]. However, dynamic surface technology
relies on the characteristics of ﬁrst-order ﬁlters to achieve
simpliﬁed calculations. Its signal transitions are relatively
gradual, making it difﬁcult to apply efﬁciently in drones that
demand high response speeds [12]. Therefore, based on the
dynamic surface technique, it is of great necessity to further
enhance the response speed of the control system.
It is also worth noting that quadrotor unmanned aerial
vehicles often encounter external disturbances such as wind
gusts and ground effects. If these disturbance signals cannot
be compensated for in a timely manner, the UAV mission
is highly likely to fail. Currently, constructing a disturbance
observer based on feedforward control is recognized as one
of the most effective solutions to this problem. [13], [14]. In
[13], a sliding mode observer is proposed to ensure that dis-
turbance signals are compensated within ﬁxed-time. In [14],
fuzzy logic is introduced into the disturbance observer, which
simultaneously compensates for the lumped disturbances of
the system. However, the approximation capability of fuzzy
logic is limited, and the output of the sliding mode observer
is not smooth, which will affect the control performance.
In addition, rapidity is a crucial indicator for evaluating
system performance. Different from traditional inﬁnite-time
control, ﬁnite-time control ensures the system’s rapidity by
introducing fractional power terms to drive errors back to
the equilibrium point. As demonstrated by the conclusions
in [15]–[17], ﬁnite-time control can signiﬁcantly reduce
the system’s convergence time, which provides important
inspiration for the research in this paper.
Based on the above literature review, a new ﬁnite-time
control scheme is proposed, the details of which are: A
Finite-Time Extended State Observer(FTESO) is used to
estimate disturbances, and the ﬁnite-time command ﬁltering
is introduced into the backstepping design process. The
advantages of proposed scheme are:
(i) Compared with the observer in [13], the proposed ob-
server does not exhibit chattering, has a simpler structure, and
achieves the ﬁnite-time convergence of observation errors.
(ii) Finite-time theory is applied to the design of the
observer, ﬁlter, and controller, ensuring that all variables can
converge to the neighborhood of the equilibrium point in
ﬁnite-time.
IAENG International Journal of Applied Mathematics
Volume 56, Issue 3, March 2026, Pages 978-987
 
______________________________________________________________________________________

## Page 2

(iii) The hyperbolic tangent function is chosen as the
saturation function to alleviate the actuator burden.
In Section II, the Euler angles modeling scheme for the
quadrotor UAV is introduced. In Section III, the quadrotor
UAV is decomposed into an inner-loop system and an outer-
loop system. Control schemes for both the inner and outer
loops are proposed separately. A global stability proof based
on Lyapunov theory is proposed in Section IV. In section
V, the effectiveness of the algorithm is veriﬁed through
numerical simulations.
II. MODEL DESCRIPTION
A.
Model of quadrotor UAV
The structural diagram of a quadrotor UAV is shown in
Fig.1. O-b1b2b3 denotes a inertial coordinate system, which
remains relatively stationary with respect to the ground.
O-c1c2c3 represents a body coordinate system that stays
relatively stationary relative to the quadrotor UAV. The
relative position of the two coordinate systems in three-
dimensional space is denoted by x, y, z. φ is the roll angle,
θ is the pitch angle, and ψ is the yaw angle. The angular
velocities corresponding to the three Euler angles are de-
noted by p, q,and r respectively. The four rotors are driven
by M1, M2, M3, M4, and the state variable is selected as
X = [ ˙x, ˙y, ˙z, x, y, z, p, q, r, φ, θ, ψ]T = [x1, · · · , x12]T.
Before introducing the mathematical model, the following
assumptions need to be used.
Assumption 1 The structural parameters of the system are
constant.
Assumption 2 To rule out extreme cases such as the UAV
ﬂipping, the roll angle φ and pitch angle θ of the UAV are
limited to the range ( π
2 , −π
2 ).
Assumption 3 The external disturbance signals are con-
tinuous and differentiable.
The common modeling expressions of the quadrotor UAV
are presented as













































˙x1 = [cos(x10) cos(x12) sin(x11)+sin(x10) sin(x12)]s(u1)−ktx1
m
˙x2 = [(cosx10 sin(x11) sin(x12)−cos(x12) sin(x10)]s(u1)−ktx2
m
˙x3 = [cos(x11) cos(x10)]s(u1)−mg−ktx3
m
˙x4 = x1
˙x5 = x2
˙x6 = x3
˙x7 = −krx7−x8x9(Ix−Iy)+s(u2)+dp
Ix
˙x8 = −krx8−x7x9(Ix−Iz)+s(u3)+dq
Iy
˙x9 = −krx9(Iy−Ix)+s(u4)+dr
Iz
˙x10 = x7 + x8 sin(x10) tan(x11) + x9 cos(x10) tan(x11)
˙x11 = x8 cos(x10) −x9 sin(x10)
˙x12 = x8 sin(x10)+x9 cos(x10)
cos(x11)
(1)
where u1 is the lift force, u2, u3,and u4 represent the input
torques in three directions, kr, kt are the drag coefﬁcient, m
is the mass, and g is the gravitational acceleration. Ix, Iy, Iz
are the moments of inertia, and they are all constants. dp, dq,
and dr, are used to describe disturbances such as gusts
that may be encountered during ﬂight and those caused
by modeling dynamics. s(·) is a saturation function of the
system. In (1), the input signals are u1, u2, u3,and u4 and
the output signals are x, y, z, φ, θ, ψ.
Remark 1 Most traditional schemes use the sign functions
as the saturation functions [20], [21], which will lead to
drastic changes in the system input. To ensure the system
obtains a smooth input signal, a hyperbolic tangent-type
saturation function is adopted in the proposed scheme. The
speciﬁc form is
s(x) = xmax tanh(
x
xmax
)
(2)
where x represents an arbitrary variable, and its allowed
maximum value is xmax.
Our control objective is summarized as
(i) A disturbance observer is designed, which can provide
the system with an estimated values approximating the actual
disturbance within ﬁnite-time.
(ii) Ensure that both the ﬂight trajectory and attitude angles
of the quadrotor UAV can track desired signals, and all of
the variables in the system can converge to the vicinity of
the equilibrium point within ﬁnite-time.
In the process of controller design and proof, the following
lemmas are required.
B.
preparatory knowledge
Lemma 1 [18] For arbitrary x = [x1, x2, · · · , xn]T, and
p ∈(0, 1], the following inequality is ture
(
n
X
i=1
|xi|)p <
n
X
i=1
|xi|p < n1−p(
n
X
i=1
|xi|)p
(3)
Lemma 2 [19] Consider the nonlinear system ˙x(t) =
f(x(t)), if the Lyapunov function of the system satisﬁes:
˙V (x) ⩽−AV s(x) + B
(4)
where A > 0, B > 0, s ∈(0, 1), the nonlinear system can
converge to X = {x|V s ⩽
B
Aν(1−s)} in a ﬁnite-time. The
convergence time T satisﬁes
T ⩽V 1−s(t0)
Aν(1 −s)
(5)
where ν ∈(0, 1), t0 denotes the initial time.
III. CONTROLLER DESIGN
It can be known from 1 that the system is an underactuated
system. A double closed-loop control strategy is used to
convert the system into a fully actuated system.
The inner loop system is selected as
 ˙X1=A1X2
˙X2=A2+B1s(ui)+D1
(6)
where
X1
=
[x6, x10, x11,
x12]T,
X2
=
[x3, x7, x8, x9]T,
ui
=
[u1, u2, u3, u4]T,
B1
=
diag(cos(x10) cos(x11)/m, 1/Ix, 1/Iy, 1/Iz)),
D1 = [d11, d12, d13, d14]T = [0, dp
Ix , dq
Iy , dr
Iz ]T.
A1 =


1
0
0
0
0
1
sin(x10) tan(x11)
cos(x10) tan(x11)
0
0
cos(x10)
−sin(x10)
0
0
sin(x10)
cos(x11)
cos(x10)
cos(x11)


(7)
IAENG International Journal of Applied Mathematics
Volume 56, Issue 3, March 2026, Pages 978-987
 
______________________________________________________________________________________

## Page 3

c
c₃
₁
c₂
ψ
φ
b
θ
₁
M
b₂
b₃
1
M 2
M3
M 4
o
o
Fig. 1.
Quadrotor UAV Model.
A2 =


(−mg −ktx3)/m
[−krx7 −x8x9(Iz −Iy)]/Ix
[−krx8 −x7x9(Ix −Iz)]/Iy
[−krx9 −x7x8(Iy −Ix)]/Iz


(8)
The outer loop control system is selected as
 ˙X3 = A3X4
˙X4 = A4 + B2s(uo)
(9)
where
X3
=
[x4, x5]T, A3
=
diag(1, 1),
X4
=
[x1, x2]T, A4
= [−ktx1
m , −ktx2
m ]T, uo
= [ux, uy]T
=
[cos x10 sin x11, sin x10]T,where ux and uy can be regarded
as the equivalent input signals of the horizontal control
system. The speciﬁc form of the system matrix B2 is as
follows:
B2 =
"
s(u1)
m
cos(x12)
s(u1)
m
sin(x12)
s(u1)
m
cos(x12)
−s(u1)
m
cos(x12)
#
(10)
By this way, (1) is decomposed into two strict-feedback
fully-actuated systems. In the following context, the con-
trollers of (6) and (9) will be designed respectively.
A. Inner loop control system
To ensure that the disturbance vector D1 is compensated
within ﬁnite-time, the extended state observer is used to
observe the disturbance signals.
In the extended state observer, deﬁne Ω1 = X2, Ω2 =
D1, ˙Ω2 = F1(t). F1(t) is a vector composed of unknown
but bounded functions. Based on this, the equations of the
extended system can be written as
˙Ω1
=
A2+B1s(ui)+Ω2
˙Ω2
=
F1(t)
(11)
The estimated values of Ω1 and Ω2 can be represented by
ˆΩ1 and ˆΩ2. The errors between the observed values and the
actual values are ˜Ω1 = ˆΩ1 −Ω1, ˜Ω2 = ˆΩ2 −Ω2. Based on
(11), the ﬁnite-time extended state observer is designed as
˙ˆΩ1
=
A2+B1s(ui)+ˆΩ2 −α1(
l
˜Ω1
kβ1
+ ˜Ω1)
(12)
˙ˆΩ2
=
−α2(
l
˜Ω1
kβ2
+ 2
l
˜Ω1
kβ1
+ ˜Ω1) −F1(t) (13)
where α1, α2 > 0, β1 ∈( 1
2, 1), β2 = 2β1 −1. ⌈·⌋a denotes
raising each element in the matrix to the a-th power. The
errors dynamic of the extended state observer are
˙˜Ω1
=
˜Ω2 −α1(
l
˜Ω1
kβ1
+ ˜Ω1)
˙˜Ω2
=
−α1(
l
˜Ω1
kβ2
+ 2
l
˜Ω1
kβ1
+ ˜Ω1) −F1(t) (14)
Proof: The error vector is chosen as follows
e
=
[˜ΩT
1 , ˜ΩT
2 ]T
(15)
E
=
[(
l
˜Ω1
kβ1
+ ˜Ω1)T , ˜ΩT
2 ]T
(16)
The derivative of (16) is
e
=
[˜ΩT
1 , ˜ΩT
2 ]T
(17)
˙E
=
diag(|˜Ω1|β1−1, |˜Ω1|β1−1)H1E
(18)
+H2E + M
where the Hurwitz matrixs H1 = −[β1α1I3, β1I3; −α2, O3],
H2
=
[−α1I3, I3; −α2, O3]. M
=
[O3; F1], O3
=
diag(0, 0, 0). Therefore, there exists a matrix P that satisﬁes
PH1 + HT
1 P
≤
−Q1
(19)
PH2 + HT
2 P
≤
−Q2
(20)
where QT
1 = Q1, QT
2 = Q2.The Lyapunov function of the
observer is chosen as
Vd(e) = ET PE
(21)
Combining equation (18), the derivative of V can be
obtained as
˙Vd
=
ET [diag(|˜Ω1|β1−1, |˜Ω1|β1−1)(PH1
(22)
+HT
1 P)]ET + ET (PH2 + HT
2 P)E
+M T PE + ET PM
IAENG International Journal of Applied Mathematics
Volume 56, Issue 3, March 2026, Pages 978-987
 
______________________________________________________________________________________

## Page 4

Substituting (19) and (20) into (22), it can be known that
˙Vd
≤
−(|˜Ω1|max)β1−1ET Q1E −ET Q2E
(23)
+2||E||||P||||M||
|˜Ω1|max ≤||˜Ω1|| ≤||E||
1
q , (q ∈(0.5, 1)), and combine
the properties of matrices, one has:
˙Vd
≤
−λmin(Q1)||E||3−1
β1 −λmin(Q2)||E||2
+2||E|| ∗||P|| ∗||M||
(24)
Since
both
F1
and
||D1||
are
bounded,
the
con-
clusion
that
2||E||||P||||M||
≤
2
√
3 ¯F1||E||||P||
≤
2
√
3 ¯F1λminP −1
2 V
1
2
d ||P||. Then
˙Vd ≤−γ1V
3
2 −
1
2β1
d
−γ2Vd + γ3V
1
2
d
(25)
where
γ1
=
λmin(Q1)λmax(P)
3
2 −
1
2β1 , γ2
=
λmin(Q2)λmax(P)−1, γ3
=
2
√
3 ¯F1λmin(P)−1
2 ||P||. It
can be known from the conclusion of Lemma 2 that the
Extended State Observer (13) can provide a disturbance
estimation vector ˆΩ2 = [dh1, dh2, dh3, dh4]T for the system,
and the estimation errors converge to the neighborhood
around
the
equilibrium
point
within
ﬁnite-time.
The
convergence time Td and convergence domain Sd satisfy:
Td
≤
ln(1 + (γ2 −ϵ2)Vd(e)
1−β1
2β1 /(γ1 −ϵ1))
(γ2 −ϵ2) 1−β1
2β1
(26)
Sd
=
{e0|γ1Vd(e)
2β1−1
2β1
+ γ2Vd(e)
1
2 < γ3}
(27)
where ϵ1 ∈(0, γ1), ϵ2 ∈(0, γ1) are positive constant.
Based on the above proof, the observer (13) can com-
pensate for disturbances within ﬁnite-time. Next, the design
of the ﬁnite-time controller is carried out based on back-
stepping control. The following coordinate transformation is
necessary:
z1
=
X1 −X1d
(28)
z2
=
X2 −¯ς1
(29)
where X1d denotes the expected signals of the inner loop. To
reduce the computational burden of the system, a ﬁrst-order
low-pass ﬁlter is incorporated into the controller. ¯ς1 is the
output of the ﬁlter, and the ﬁlter is
¯ς1 = ς1 −σ1˙¯ς1
(30)
where σ1 = diag(σ11, σ12, σ13, σ14), whose diagonal ele-
ments are design parameters. ς1 is the virtual control law
in backstepping control. The application of the ﬁlter will
introduce ﬁlter errors(¯ς1 −ς1). A compensation mechanism
is used to ensure that the impact of ﬁlter errors on the system
is eliminated within ﬁnite-time.
˙ξ1
=
−m1ξ1 + A1¯ς1 −A1ς1 + A1ξ2 −P1l1 (31)
˙ξ2
=
−m2ξ2 −A1ξ1 −Q1l2
(32)
where ξ1, ξ2 are compensation signals, P1, Q1 are diagonal
matrices, whose diagonal elements are the signs of the
compensation signals. m1, m2, l1, l2 are the positive design
parameters.
Due to the existence of the compensation mechanism, it
is necessary to deﬁne the error transformations
χ1
=
z1 −ξ1
(33)
χ2
=
z2 −ξ2
(34)
Step 1:
Take the derivative of the error vector χ1, one gets
˙χ1 = A1χ2−˙X1d+A1ς1 + m1ξ1 + P1l1
(35)
A Lyapunov function is chosen
V1 = 1
2χT
1 χ1
(36)
Taking the derivative yields
˙V1 = χT
1 (A1χ2−˙X1d+A1ς1 + m1ξ1 + P1l1)
(37)
According to (37), the virtual control law is designed as
ς1 = A−1
1 (−m1z1 + ˙X1d −c1 ⌈χ1⌋2p−1)
(38)
where c1 > 0, p > 0.5. Substituting (38) into (37), one can
get
˙V1 = −m1χT
1 χ1 + χT
1 A1χ2 −c1(χT
1 χ1)p + χT
1 P1l1 (39)
Step 2:
The time derivative of χ2 can be obtained as:
˙χ2
=
A2+B1s(ui)+D1
(40)
−˙¯ς1 + m2ξ2 + A1ξ1 + Q1l2
A Lyapunov function for the entire inner loop can be
chosen as:
Vi = V1 + 1
2χT
2 χ2
(41)
According to (40) and (41), one has
˙Vi
=
˙V1 + χT
2 [A2+B1s(ui)+D1
−˙¯ς1 + m2ξ2 + A1ξ1 + Q1l2]
(42)
In (42), the error vector between the actual input ui and
the saturated input s(ui) is deﬁned as
T1 = s(ui) −ui
(43)
The actual control law appears in (43), and is designed as
ui
=
B−1
1 (−A2−ˆΩ2 + ˙¯ς1 −m2z2
−3
2χ2 −1
2χ1 −A1z1 −c2 ⌈χ2⌋2p−1)
(44)
where c2 > 0.
B.
Outer controller design
The structures of the outer-loop controller and the inner-
loop controller are similar. This section directly presents the
outer-loop controller.
Introduce the coordinate transformation as
z3
=
X3 −X3d
(45)
z4
=
X4 −¯ς2
(46)
χ3
=
z3 −ξ3
(47)
χ4
=
z4 −ξ4
(48)
X3d is the desired signal vector of the outer loop. ¯ς2 is
a ﬁlter output. Deﬁne the Lyapunov function of the outer
IAENG International Journal of Applied Mathematics
Volume 56, Issue 3, March 2026, Pages 978-987
 
______________________________________________________________________________________

## Page 5

loop as Vo = 1
2χT
3 χ3 + 1
2χT
4 χ4. The command ﬁlter and the
compensation mechanisms with ﬁnite-time convergence are
designed as:
¯ς2
=
ς2 −σ2˙¯ς2
(49)
˙ξ3
=
−m3ξ3 + A3¯ς2
(50)
−A3ς2 + A3ξ4 −P2l3
˙ξ4
=
−m4ξ4 −A3ξ3 −Q2l4
(51)
where m3, m4, l3, l4 > 0, P2 and Q2 are the sign function
matrices of ξ3 and ξ4, respectively.
The virtual control law and actual control law of the outer-
loop control system are
ς2 = A−1
3 (−m3z3 + ˙X3d −c3 ⌈χ3⌋2p−1)
(52)
uo
=
B−1
2 (−A4 + ˙¯ς2 −m4z4 −3
2χ4
−1
2χ3 −A3z3 −c4 ⌈χ4⌋2p−1)
(53)
where c3, c4 > 0. Deﬁne T2 = s(uo) −uo.
C. Analysis of stability
Theorem 1 For system (1) with Assumpions 1-3, under
the action of the extended state observer(13), the ﬁlter and its
compensation mechanism (30), (31), (32), (49), (50), (51),
the virtual control law (38), (52), and the actual control
law (44), (53), all states of the system can converge to
a small neighborhood around the equilibrium point within
ﬁnite-time.
Proof A total Lyapunov function is constructed as
Vs = Vi + Vo
(54)
The derivation of Vs can be obtained as
˙Vs
=
−
4
X
i=1
miχi −
4
X
i=1
ciχ2p
i
+ χT
1 Pl1
+χT
3 P2l3 + χT
2 Q1l2 + χT
4 Q2l4
(55)
+χT
2 ˜Ω2 + χT
2 B1T1 + χT
3 B2T2
−3
2χT
2 χ2 −1
2χT
1 χ1
−3
2χT
4 χ4 −1
2χT
3 χ3
According to young’s inequality, one has
χT
1 Pl1
≤
1
2χT
1 χ1 + 1
2l2
1
χT
2 Ql2
≤
1
2χT
2 χ2 + 1
2l2
2
χT
2 ˜Ω2
≤
1
2χT
2 χ2 + 1
2||˜Ω2||2
χT
2 B1T1
≤
1
2χT
2 χ2 + ||B1T1 max||2
2
χT
3 P2l3
≤
1
2χT
3 χ3 + 1
2l2
3
(56)
χT
4 Q2l4
≤
1
2χT
4 χ4 + 1
2l2
4
χT
4 B2T2
≤
1
2χT
4 χ4 + ||B2T2 max||2
2
Substituting (56) into (55) arrives at
˙Vs
≤
−
4
X
i=1
mi(χT
i χi) −
4
X
i=1
ci(χT
i χi)p
+
4
X
i=1
(1
2l2
i ) + 1
2
˜DT
1 ˜D1
+||B1T1 max||2 + ||B2T2 max||2
2
(57)
According Lemma 1, the following inequality is true
˙Vs ≤−As1Vs −As2V p
s + Bs
(58)
where
As1
=
2 min{mi(i = 1, 2, 3, 4)},
(59)
As2
=
2p min{ci(i = 1, 2, 3, 4)}
(60)
Bs
=
1
2
˜Ω2
2 +
||B1T1 max||2 + ||B2T2 max||2
2
(61)
(58) can be equivalently transformed into
˙Vs ≤−κAs1Vs −(1 −κ)As1Vs −As2V p
s + Bs
(62)
or
˙Vs ≤−As1Vs −κAs2V p
s −(1 −κ)V p
s + Bs
(63)
where 0 < κ < 1. If (62) is true, the conclusion of Lemma
2 indicates that the tracking error will converge to Vs ≤
Bs
(1−κ)As1 , and the convergence time is
Ts1 ≤
1
κAs1p ln [κAs1V p
s (0) + As2]
As2
(64)
where
Vs(0)
represents
the
energy
of
the
initial
s-
tate.
If inequality (63) holds, review Lemma 2, one can directly
obtain that the error will converge to V p
s ≤
Bs
(1−κ)As2 in a
ﬁnite time. the convergence time is
Ts2 ≤
1
As1p ln[As1V p
s (0) + κAs2][As1V p
s (0) + κAs2]
κAs2
(65)
Based on the above analysis, the errors satisﬁe χ =
{(χ1, χ2, χ3, χ4)|V p
s ≤max{
Bs
(1−κ)As1 ,
Bs
(1−κ)As2 }}. The er-
rors χ converge within a ﬁnite-time Ts = max{Ts1, Ts2}.
According to the deﬁnition of the tracking errors: χi =
zi −ξi, if the conclusion that ξi converges is true, zi also
converges. The proof with the convergence of ξi is given as
follows:
A Lyapunov function about ξi is selected as
Vξ =
4
X
i=1
1
2ξT
i ξi
(66)
IAENG International Journal of Applied Mathematics
Volume 56, Issue 3, March 2026, Pages 978-987
 
______________________________________________________________________________________

## Page 6

Taking the derivative of Vξ, one gets
˙Vξ
=
4
X
i=1
−miξT
i ξi + ξT
1 A1(¯ς1 −ς1) + ξT
3 A3(¯ς2 −ς2)
−
4
X
i=1
(l1i|ξ1i| −l2i|ξ2i|)
(67)
−
2
X
j=1
(l3i|ξ3i| −l4i|ξ4i|)
Inspired by [22], if an appropriate l is selected, the
following inequality can be made to hold.
ξT
1 A1(¯ς1 −ς1)
≤
4
X
i=1
¯ϖi
(68)
ξT
3 A3(¯ς2 −ς2)
≤
2
X
j=1
˘ϖj
(69)
where ¯ϖi, ˘ϖj are bounded.
Substitute (68) and (69) into (67), we have
˙Vξ
≤
4
X
i=1
(−miξT
i ξi) −l2ξ2 −l4ξ4
−
4
X
i=1
(l1i|ξ1i| −¯ϖi) −
2
X
i=1
(l3i|ξ3i| −˘ϖi)
≤
−Aξ1Vξ −Aξ2V
1
2
ξ
(70)
where
Aξ1
=
2 min{mi(i
=
1, 2, 3, 4)},
Aξ2
=
√
2 min{l1i −¯ϖi, l3i −˘ϖi} are positive. Review Lemma
2, ξi can also converge to equilibrium in a ﬁnite-time Tξ.
Up to this point, the conclusion that zi can converge to
the neighborhood around the equilibrium point within ﬁnite-
time Ts ≤max{Td, Ts, Tξ} can be known. The proof is
completed.
IV. NUMERICAL SIMULATION EXPERIMENT
The numerical simulation in this paper is completed using
MATLAB software. It is assumed that the structural pa-
rameters of a quadrotor UAV are as follows: m = 2.4kg,
g = 10N/s2, Ix = Iy = 0.2kg · m2, Iz = 0.3kg · m2,
kt = kr = 0.006N · m/s. The selection of all control
parameters can refer to Table 1.
Remark 2 The principles for parameter selection are as
follows: The maximum total lift and the maximum input
torque are given based on the structural parameters of the
UAV. Setting larger observer parameters α1, α2 can enhance
the speed at which the observer approximates disturbance
signals, thereby improving the robustness of the system.
Under ideal circumstances, the ﬁlter parameters σ1i, σ2i
should be close to the sampling period. Providing a smaller
control gains c1, c2, c3,and c4 help the attitude angle track
the inverse solution signals provided by the outer loop more
easily. The selection of the remaining parameters has little
signiﬁcant impact on the control effect, so there is greater
ﬂexibility in selection.
The quadrotor UAV is required to ﬂy along a cardioid
in the air. Given Reference Signal: X3d = [2 cos(0.2t) −
cos(0.4t), 2 sin(0.2t) −sin(0.4t)]T . The ﬂight altitude is 5
meters. Set the simulation time to 60s. When t = 10s, the
TABLE I
CONTROL PARAMETERS
Parameter
Value
α1
5
α2
10
β1
0.8
σ1i, σ2i(i = 1, 2, 3, 4)
0.02
m1
2.2
m2
1.4
m3
7.2
m4
2.3
li(i = 1, 2, 3, 4)
0.1
c1
1.7
c2
0.08
c3
0.26
c4
0.06
u1 max
32
u2 max
5
u3 max
5
u4 max
5
p
0.9
external disturbance signals are applied in the system, and
its speciﬁc expression is: D1 = [0, 0.4 cos(t)+0.2 sin(0.5t),
0.4 sin(t), 0.2 cos(2t)+0.1 sin(t)]T . The initial values of all
variables are set to 0. [23] uses a neural network disturbance
observer to compensate for disturbance signals. This scheme
is selected for comparison with the scheme proposed in
this paper. The program runtime is completed within three
seconds. All of the numerical simulation results are shown
in Fig.2-Fig.8.
Fig.2 shows the output curves of the inner-loop system.
All signals can track the given reference signals within 4.5
seconds. The inner-loop control system can accurately track
the desired signal provided by the outer loop, which means
the UAV can complete the trajectory tracking task. After the
fault occurs, the system exhibits slight chattering and does
not deviate from the desired trajectory. The control effect is
good.
Fig.3 is the output curves of the outer-loop system. It
can be seen that the system can accurately track the given
reference signal within 2.5 seconds. In addition, in the
presence of external disturbances, the UAV does not deviate
from the desired trajectory.
Fig.4 shows the ﬂight trajectory of the UAV in three-
dimensional space. Among them, the blue line represents the
trajectory of the scheme proposed in this paper, and the red
line represents the ﬂight trajectory of the scheme in [23]. It
can be seen from the ﬁgure that the overshoot of the proposed
scheme is smaller. Notably, in the presence of disturbances,
the scheme in [23] exhibits obvious chattering; in contrast,
the chattering phenomenon of the proposed scheme is not
obvious.
The tracking effect of the disturbance observer is shown
in Fig.5. Due to the high coupling inherent in the system, the
observer will generate slight ﬂuctuations in the initial stage,
and this phenomenon will not affect the control effect. If the
disturbances occur, the observer can quickly compensate for
disturbance signals, which means it can provide the controller
with rapid and accurate estimates of disturbances.
Fig. 6 and Fig. 7 show the response curves of the inner-
loop compensation signals and the outer-loop compensation
signals, respectively. Within four seconds, all compensation
IAENG International Journal of Applied Mathematics
Volume 56, Issue 3, March 2026, Pages 978-987
 
______________________________________________________________________________________

## Page 7

0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Time(s)
0
5
Distance(m)
z
zd
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Time(s)
-0.5
0
0.5
Roll(rad)
d
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Time(s)
-0.5
0
0.5
Pitch(rad)
d
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Time(s)
-0.2
-0.1
0
Yaw(rad)
d
Fig. 2.
Inner-loop Control Effect.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Time(s)
-4
-2
0
2
Distance(m)
x
xd
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Time(s)
-2
-1
0
1
2
Distance(m)
y
yd
Fig. 3.
Outer-loop Control Effect.
signals converge to the neighborhood near the equilibrium
point, which indicates that the compensator has reached a
steady state.
Finally, Fig.8 shows the input signals of the quadrotor
UAV. Due to the strong coupling between the roll angle and
the pitch angle, the two angles are inevitably affected by each
other in the process of tracking their respective reference
signals. As a result, chattering occurs during the transient
process, which is acceptable.
V. CONCLUSION
A novel ﬁnite-time trajectory tracking control scheme for
the quadrotor UAVs is proposed in this paper. Based on
Lyapunov theory, both the proposed controller and observer
are proven to achieve ﬁnite-time convergence. The introduc-
tion of command ﬁltering technology not only avoids the
differentiation of complex matrices, but also achieves the ap-
proximation of the derivative of the virtual control law within
a ﬁnite time. Numerical simulation results demonstrate that
the proposed scheme exhibits excellent control performance,
with no variables showing divergence. For future work, we
will adopt optimization algorithms to seek more appropriate
control parameters.
REFERENCES
[1] Qin, Chao et al.”Perception-Aware Image-Based Visual Servoing of
Aggressive Quadrotor UAVs”, IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mecha-
tronics, vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 2020-2028, 2023.
[2] Yuan Gao, Ling Ren, Tianwei Shi, Teng Xu, and Jianbang Ding,
”Autonomous Obstacle Avoidance Algorithm for Unmanned Aerial
Vehicles Based on Deep Reinforcement Learning,” Engineering Let-
ters, vol. 32, no. 3, pp650-660, 2024.
[3] Yuan Fang, Limin Ouyang, Yuyun Xia, and Yinghong Tian, ”Advanced
MPC Controller with Disturbance Suppression and Input Delay Com-
pensation for Spherical Quadrotor UAV,” Engineering Letters, vol. 33,
no. 4, pp1115-1124, 2025.
IAENG International Journal of Applied Mathematics
Volume 56, Issue 3, March 2026, Pages 978-987
 
______________________________________________________________________________________

## Page 8

Fig. 4.
Flight Trajectory.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Time(s)
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
Disturbance signal
d12
dh2
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Time(s)
-0.5
0
0.5
d13
dh3
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Time(s)
-0.05
0
0.05
d14
dh4
Fig. 5.
Disturbance Signal Compensation Effect.
[4] N. Wanore Madebo, C. Merga Abdissa and L. Negash Lemma,
”Enhanced Trajectory Control of Quadrotor UAV Using Fuzzy PID
Based Recurrent Neural Network Controller” in IEEE Access, vol.
12, pp. 190454-190469, 2024.
[5] Meng Li, and Libing Wu, ”Fuzzy Adaptive Control for Strict-Feedback
Uncertain Nonlinear Systems with Input Delays and Saturations,”
Engineering Letters, vol. 33, no. 5, pp1259-1266, 2025.
[6] M. Menebo Madebo, ”Neuro-Fuzzy-Based Adaptive Sliding Mode
Control of Quadrotor UAV in the Presence of Matched and Unmatched
Uncertainties” in IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 117745-117760, 2024.
[7] Claudio Rosales, Carlos Vacca Sisterna, Francisco Rossomando et al.
”Super-twisting adaptive control of a quadrotor”, ISA Transactions,
2025.
[8] Y. Hou, D. Chen and S. Yang, ”Adaptive Robust Trajectory Track-
ing Controller for a Quadrotor UAV With Uncertain Environment
Parameters Based on Backstepping Sliding Mode Method,” in IEEE
Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering, vol. 22, pp.
4446-4456, 2025.
[9] Mehmet Karahan, ”Robust Backstepping Control of a Quadrotor Un-
manned Aerial Vehicle under Colored Noises,” Computers, Materials
and Continua, vol. 82, 2025.
[10] J. -T. Huang and Y. -W. Jiang, ”Robust Adaptive Backstepping Control
of Quadrotors With Unknown Input Gains,” in IEEE Access, vol. 11,
pp. 33069-33079, 2023.
[11] Syed Awais Ali Shah, Shuanghe Yu, ”Robust ﬁnite-time model refer-
ence adaptive control for attitude control of four-rotor unmanned aerial
vehicle with disturbances”, Ain Shams Engineering Journal, vol.16,
2025.
[12] Y. Li, Z. Li, X. Yu, X. Zheng, X. Yang and Y. Yang, ”Attitude Tracking
Control for Quadrotors Under Unknown Disturbances Based on Dual-
Loop Nonlinear Command Filters,” in IEEE Transactions on Circuits
and Systems II: Express Briefs, vol. 71, no. 5, pp. 2769-2773, 2024.
[13] Li, J., Yang, Y., Hua, C. ”Fixed-time backstepping control design
for high-order strict-feedback non-linear systems via terminal sliding
mode”. IET Control Theory Appl, vol.11, pp.1184-1193, 2017.
[14] Changhui Wang, Nan Yang, Wencheng Li et al, ”Event-triggered
ﬁnite-time fuzzy tracking control for a time-varying state constrained
quadrotor system based on disturbance observer”, Aerospace Science
and Technology, vol.151, 2024.
[15] Omid Moﬁd, Saleh Mobayen, ”Adaptive sliding mode control for
ﬁnite-time stability of quad-rotor UAVs with parametric uncertainties”,
ISA Transactions, vol.72, 2018.
IAENG International Journal of Applied Mathematics
Volume 56, Issue 3, March 2026, Pages 978-987
 
______________________________________________________________________________________

## Page 9

0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Time(s)
-20
-10
0
11
21
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Time(s)
-1
0
1
12
22
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Time(s)
-1
0
1
13
21
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Time(s)
-0.2
-0.1
0
Compensation signals
14
21
Fig. 6.
Inner-loop Filtering Compensation Signals.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Time(s)
-10
-5
0
Compensation signals
31
41
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Time(s)
-6
-4
-2
0
2
33
42
Fig. 7.
Outer-loop Filtering Compensation Signals.
[16] Yunpeng Ju, Guoqiang Diao, ”Virtual ﬁnite time control of quadrotor
unmanned aerial vehicle based on set stability”, Journal of the Franklin
Institute, vol.72, 2025.
[17] T. Jiang, D. Lin and T. Song, ”Finite-Time Backstepping Control for
Quadrotors With Disturbances and Input Constraints,” in IEEE Access,
vol. 6, pp. 62037-62049, 2018.
[18] L. Zhao, J. Yu and Q. -G. Wang, ”Finite-Time Tracking Control
for Nonlinear Systems via Adaptive Neural Output Feedback and
Command Filtered Backstepping,” in IEEE Transactions on Neural
Networks and Learning Systems, vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 1474-1485, 2021.
[19] X. Chen, F. Zhao, Y. Liu, H. Liu, T. Huang and J. Qiu, ”Reduced-
Order Observer-Based Preassigned Finite-Time Control of Nonlinear
Systems and Its Applications,” in IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man,
and Cybernetics: Systems, vol. 53, no. 7, pp. 4205-4215, 2023.
[20] Z. Song, P. Li, Z. Wang, X. Huang and W. Liu, ”Adaptive Tracking
Control for Switched Uncertain Nonlinear Systems With Input Satu-
ration and Unmodeled Dynamics,” in IEEE Transactions on Circuits
and Systems II: Express Briefs, vol. 67, no. 12, pp. 3152-3156, 2020.
[21] Y. Ren, Z. Liu, Z. Zhao and H. -K. Lam, ”Adaptive Active Anti-
Vibration Control for a 3-D Helicopter Flexible Slung-Load System
With Input Saturations and Backlash,” in IEEE Transactions on
Aerospace and Electronic Systems, vol. 60, no. 1, pp. 320-333, 2024.
[22] Y. Lu, W. Liu and B. Ma, ”Finite-Time Command Filtered Tracking
Control for Time-Varying Full State-Constrained Nonlinear Systems
With Unknown Input Delay,” in IEEE Transactions on Circuits and
Systems II: Express Briefs, vol. 69, no. 12, pp. 4954-4958, 2022.
[23] B. Li, M. Chen, S. Qi, ”Finite-time trajectory tracking control of
quadrotor UAVs based on neural network disturbance observer and
command ﬁlter,” International Journal of Systems Science, vol. 56,
no. 7, pp. 1474–1488, 2024.
IAENG International Journal of Applied Mathematics
Volume 56, Issue 3, March 2026, Pages 978-987
 
______________________________________________________________________________________

## Page 10

0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Time(s)
20
25
30
35
Lift force(N)
u1
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Time(s)
-5
0
5
Torque(N·m)
u2
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Time(s)
-5
0
5
Torque(N·m)
u3
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Time(s)
0
2
4
Torque(N·m)
u4
Fig. 8.
Input Signals.
IAENG International Journal of Applied Mathematics
Volume 56, Issue 3, March 2026, Pages 978-987
 
______________________________________________________________________________________
