# s12555-025-0243-y.pdf

## Page 1

International Journal of Control, Automation, and Systems 23(10) (2025) 3082-3099
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s12555-025-0243-y
ISSN:1598-6446 eISSN:2005-4092
http://www.springer.com/12555
Disturbance-observer-based Finite-time Following Control With Wind
Resistance Capability for Multiple GPS-denied UAVs
Chih-Lyang Hwang* ■, Cheng-Yi Li, and Chen-Wei Wu
Abstract: In this work, a disturbance-observer-based finite-time following control with wind resistance capability
(DO-FTFC-WRC) is designed to rapidly perform an assigned following of multi-UAV in a GPS-denied region, e.g.,
warehouse, library, factory. The inner-loop PID control in each UAV can improve its control behavior. Without the
original nonlinear complex dynamics, its outer loop is modeled by a second-order system with unknown distur-
bances, including sensor noises, system uncertainties, turbulence caused by ground effect, or extra wind gusts. The
desired 3D pose for the leader is assumed to be a virtual leader. Subsequently, followers are one-by-one to execute
a time-varying formation by adjusting their relative poses. To realize the task in the presence of disturbances, the
suggested DO-FTFC-WRC includes i) equivalent control to tackle the newly designed following task and compen-
sate the estimated disturbance, and ii) switching control with time-varying gain to deal with extra uncertainties for
enhancing robust performance. Finally, the simulations and experiments as compared with the nonlinear finite-time
following control or the inner-loop PID control with/without extra wind condition for a representative forward,
180 degrees clockwise turning, then backward motions validate the effectiveness and superiority of the proposed
DO-FTFC-WRC.
Keywords: Disturbance observer, finite-time following control, inner-loop PID control, Lyapunov stability theory,
multi-UAV.
1.
INTRODUCTION
Due to the autonomous operation, communication /pro-
cessing capabilities, and mobility, unmanned aerial ve-
hicles (UAVs) are envisaged in many applications [1-3].
However, they must have the GPS feedback for naviga-
tion. On the contrary, the navigation in the GPS-denied
region, e.g., warehouse, library, will be a challenge. It is
known that the optimization of UAV flight path to ensure
the accuracy of target surveillance or security is impor-
tant. Nevertheless, the surveillance or secure performance
of a single UAV is limited or inefficient when some ob-
structions (e.g., pillars or pipeline in the build, shelves
for inventory or book) appear in the flight path [5-9].
Hence, a multi-UAV cooperative optimization model or
the coverage path planning in wireless networks (e.g.,
WiFi network) can improve surveillance or secure effi-
ciency when obstructions of different scales appear [9-11].
Moreover, through the artificial intelligence of things, a
well-organized group of UAVs outperforms a single large
UAV in terms of device scalability, maintenance, and ex-
pense [12].
Due to the effective and efficient ability for perform-
ing complex and challenging tasks, e.g., a wide range of
security and remote monitoring applications, disaster res-
cue, communication cooperation among vehicles, the for-
mation and cooperation of multi-UAV are extensively in-
vestigated [10-29]. In [10], at the expense of the energy
consumption and transmission unreliability, a multi-UAV
cooperative path optimization model is developed to ad-
just the surveillance location of each UAV. In [11], a fuzzy
fixed time following control for multi-UAV with input
fault and saturation is designed. In [12], an AIoT-based
navigation and formation control by combining deep re-
inforcement learning reduces the collision risk of obsta-
cles and other UAVs. In [13], a multi-UAV networked
system under Wiener and Poisson random fluctuations is
achieved by stochastic robust team tracking control. In
[14], a composite adaptive disturbance observer-based de-
centralized fractional-order fault-tolerant control, incor-
porating fractional-order sliding-mode surfaces, nonlinear
disturbance observers, fuzzy wavelet neural networks, and
robust controllers, achieves the attitude tracking control of
networked UAVs. In [15], a distributed command force is
first synthesized in the position loop by an immersion and
invariance adaptation strategy for the exponential mass es-
Manuscript received March 20, 2025; revised August 6, 2025; accepted September 3, 2025. Recommended by Associate Editor Peng Yao
under the direction of Senior Editor Chan Gook Park.
Chih-Lyang Hwang is with the Intelligent Robot Center, National Taiwan University of Science and Technology, Taipei 10607, Taiwan
(e-mail: clhwang@mail.ntust.edu.tw). Cheng-Yi Li and Chen-Wei Wu are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, National Taiwan
University of Science and Technology, Taipei 10607, Taiwan (e-mails: {chair3817, wilsonwu27}@gmail.com).
*Corresponding author.
©ICROS, KIEE and Springer 2025

## Page 2

Disturbance-observer-based Finite-time Following Control With Wind Resistance Capability for Multiple ...
3083
timation. Then, an applied torque with adaptation is syn-
thesized for the attitude tracking to a command attitude.
In [16], generalized and heterogeneous multi-UAV us-
ing online RNN-based finite-time formation tracking con-
trol is achieved. In [17], enhanced recurrent fuzzy neural
fault-tolerant synchronization tracking control of multiple
unmanned airships via fractional calculus and fixed-time
prescribed performance function. In [18], adaptive con-
troller divided into an inner loop part, and an outer loop
part achieves the consensus control of attitude systems and
the tracking control of the position system, respectively.
In [19], a switched event-triggered scheme of multi-UAV
is developed by the communication mechanisms invoked
for different attack states and bringing lower data releas-
ing rate and less energy consumption based on the severity
level of replay attacks. In [20], a saturation model based
on the Gaussian error function, the unknown disturbance
solved by a disturbance observer, the Nussbaum function
for an unknown coefficient of the controller, and the radial
basis function neural networks to estimate unknown non-
linear functions are addressed. In [21], a new distributed
anti-synchronization controller is designed so that the two
tasking agents can encircle all targets while staying oppo-
site to each other. In [22], an adaptive composite controller
for each UAV is designed by combining a fuzzy system
and fast terminal sliding mode control to ensure the track-
ing errors converge to around zero. In [23], a distributed-
estimator-based finite-time prescribed performance con-
trol improves the convergence time and reduces the over-
shoot of tracking errors simultaneously. In [24], the Lya-
punov based model prediction control with collision-free
functions for the swarm system of UAVs is designed. In
[25], a time-varying formation tracking controller allow-
ing for bigger sampling intervals of multi-leader is de-
signed. In [26], time-varying formation planning and dis-
tributed control of multiple UAVs in clutter environment
is accomplished. In [27], a distributed optimal control
protocol for UAVs formation to cooperatively complete
the tracking tasks under unknown external disturbances is
proposed. In [28], a hierarchical protocol equipped with
a virtual twin layer decouples the challenges into two de-
fense schemes: one against Byzantine edge attacks on the
twin layer and the other against Byzantine node attacks on
the cyber-physical layer. In [29], a multi-UAV 3-D coop-
erative forest fire patrol planning based on dynamic patrol
information maps and terrain elevation is proposed.
Their dominant properties are summarized as follows: i)
finite-time tracking control [11,14,16,17,19,20,23]; ii) on-
line adaptive compensations [16,17,22]; iii) disturbance-
observer based compensation [14,19,20,27], iv) with-
out experimental verification [11-20,22-25,27,29], v) the
other important features: only 3D position and velocity
control [15], the hardware-in-the-loop [17], the large tran-
sients for a time-varying desired path [18], the decoupled
dynamics of formation control [19], controller designs
separated by position and attitude subsystems [22], model
prediction control [24], PC-based time-varying formation
control [26], fire patrol planning [29]. It is also known that
finite-time tracking control of time-varying pose is better
than that using asymptotical tracking control [30-32].
Most theoretical studies [11,13-20,22-24,27] consider
the nonlinear complex dynamics of each UAV for the de-
sign of formation control. Due to the limitation in edge
computing, their implemented performances will be de-
teriorated or difficult to achieve. Since the indoor UAV
can’t have a GPS for the localization and then navigation,
Lidar range finder [33] and optical sensor [34] in this ar-
ticle substitute for GPS to achieve a closed-loop feedback
system. It also can use a multimodal UAV 3D trajectory
exposure system to achieve a closed-loop system in the
GPS-denied region [35]. Since optical sensor uses visual
features on the ground to obtain the estimated 2D veloc-
ity, a uniform ground has adverse effect for the estimation.
In contrast, some patterns on the ground improve the po-
sitioning accuracy. On the other hand, Lidar range finder
can achieve an accurate and fast response for the height
of UAV. Finally, the EKF-fused Lidar range finder/optical
sensor and IMU for the real-time localization of UAV is
accomplished and verified by distributive UWB network
[30]. The corresponding 3D position error is better than
that using low frequency of mechanical antenna average
position error 0.45 m in 10 m × 10 m region [35]. It con-
firms the effectiveness of our Lidar range finder and op-
tical sensor to achieve the positioning in GPS-defined re-
gion.
After the above construction, the UAV with PID control
first improves or simplifies the system dynamic behavior
[11,36]. Nevertheless, its robust performance caused by
input fault and constraint, extra wind gusts, or other un-
certainties is often poor. To this end, outer control loop
feedback by its pose and velocity in this loop is applied
to design its acceleration command so that the 3D pose
following control of multi-UAV ameliorates the forma-
tion in the presence of the above-mentioned disturbances
(or uncertainties). At first, the connected following error
for the present UAV and following UAV is designed. The
nonlinear filtering following error dynamics of each UAV
includes linear dynamic part to shape the frequency re-
sponse, and its fractional exponent to obtain a finite-time
following ability to null following error [16,31,32]. To
deal with the disturbances brought about by system un-
certainties or extra wind gusts, a disturbance observer is
designed to compensate and attenuate their adverse ef-
fect [14,19,20]. It doesn’t need the assumption of bounded
time-derivative of disturbance [37] such that they can con-
tain high-frequency components.
The contributions of this article are abridged as fol-
lows: i) The EKF-fused Lidar range finder/optical sensor
[33,34], and IMU for the localization of indoor quadro-
tor is accomplished and verified by distributive UWB net-

## Page 3

3084
Chih-Lyang Hwang, Cheng-Yi Li, and Chen-Wei Wu
work [30] for a planned 3D pose flight. Since inner-loop
PID control achieves satisfactory control system behav-
ior [36], a novel design of connected following error for
the present UAV with the 3D time-varying poses and ve-
locities of front and rear UAVs is effectively developed
by WiFi transmission. ii) The proposed DO-FTFC-WRC
for each UAV has nonlinear filtering following error with
fractional exponent, nonlinear switching gain, and the dis-
turbance observer of totally uncertain dynamics without
the assumption of bounded time-derivative [37]. iii) When
the connected following error is about zero, the nonlin-
ear switching gain augments to obtain its fast finite-time
tracking ability; simultaneously, the observer provides the
estimation of disturbance caused by system uncertain-
ties or extra wind gusts for the real-time compensation.
iv) Besides simulations, the experiments of multi-UAV
with/without extra wind condition for a formation-change
path with forward, 180◦clockwise rotation, then back-
ward motions are successfully achieved as compared with
an inner loop PID control.
2.
PROBLEM FORMULATION
Considering UAV i with inner PID control loop to im-
prove or simplify its dynamic behavior, its outer loop is
modeled as follows [11,36]:
˙Xi
1(t) = Xi
2(t), i = 1, 2 ,..., N,
(1a)
˙Xi
2(t) = gi( ˜ui)+ f i(Xi,t),
(1b)
where Xi
1(t), Xi
2(t) ∈R6, f(Xi,t) ∈R6 are the pose,
velocity, and unknown signal, respectively; Xi(t) =

Xi
1(t)T Xi
2(t)T T; and gi( ˜ui) is the constrained and fault
control input defined as
gi( ˜ui) =
(
˜ui
csgn( ˜ui), if ˜ui
k(t)≤˜ui
c,k, k=1, 2, ..., 6,
˜ui(t),
otherwise,
(2)
where ˜ui
c = diag{ ˜ui
c,1 ˜ui
c,2 ··· ˜ui
c,6} and ˜ui(t) is the control
input with fault defined as follows:
˜ui(t) = bi(t)+ρi(t)ui(t).
(3)
Here the unknown bias fault is upper bounded by
bi(t)
 < ˆbi, ∀t, the fault gain ρi(t) = diag{ρi
1(t), ρi
2(t),
···, ρi
6(t)} is unknown but bounded by 0 < bρi
j ≤ρi
j(t) ≤
bρi
j < 1, j = 1, 2, ..., 6, and ui(t) is the acceleration input
of the ith UAV.
The Xi
1(t) and Xi
2(t) are the position and velocity with
respect to the world coordinate. For example, Xi
1,1∼3(t)
and Xi
2,1∼3(t) are obtained by the fusion of Lidar range
finder [33] and optical sensor [29] and inertia measure-
ment unit (IMU); Xi
1,4∼6(t) and Xi
2,4∼6(t) from IMU with
coordinate transformation. From (1)-(3), the low-level
PID following control (LL-PID-FC) of UAV is an inner-
loop system with its behavior reflected by f(Xi,t) and
gi( ˜ui), the outer-loop control system will design its accel-
eration command for the inner-loop control system. It re-
veals that similar motion featured UAVs can have different
inner-loop architecture, e.g., embedded processors, motor
numbers. In addition, the desired trajectory of leader is set
as follows [11,13,19]:
˙X0
1 (t) = X0
2 (t), ˙X0
2 (t) = a0(t),
(4)
where X0
1 (t), X0
2 (t), and a0(t) are the pose, velocity, and
acceleration, respectively. The nonlinear filtering follow-
ing error for UAV i is defined as [25-27]
σ i(t) = ei(t)+Ci
1ei(t)+Ci
2sgn(ei)αi,
(5)
where 0 < Ci
1 = diag{c111, c122, ..., c166}, 0 < Ci
2 =
diag{c211, c222, ..., c266}, 0 < αi < 1, ei(t) =
R t
t0 ei(τ)dτ,
and ei(t) is the following error:
ei(t) = Xi−1
1
(t)−

Xi
1(t)+di(t)+HiXi
2(t)

,
(6)
where Hi ∈R6×6 is the velocity gain of UAV i to adjust
different following velocities, di(t) is the relative time-
varying 3D pose of UAV i with respect to UAV (i −1).
To realize the multi- UAV following task, the connected
following error is defined [38]:
si(t) = Ci
3σ i(t)−σ i+1(t),
(7)
where si(t) ∈R6, 0 < Ci
3 = ηiI6. Larger ηi, smaller cou-
pled feature. Because UAV i is under-actuated, i.e., 4
inputs for thrust force and three torques, 6 outputs for
the 3D pose, two of desired outputs must depend on the
others. Given the 3D desired position (xi
11,d(t), xi
12,d(t),
xi
13,d(t)) = (xi
d, yi
d, zi
d) and the desired yaw angle xi
16,d(t) =
ψi
d, then the desired roll and pitch angles (i.e., xi
14,d(t) =
φ i
d, xi
15,d(t) = θ i
d) are given as follows [16]:
φ i
d = sin−1









h
hi
1(xi
11,d)sψi
d −hi
2(xi
12,d)cψi
d
i
v
u
u
t
hi
1(xi
11,d)
2 +
hi
2(xi
12,d)
2
+
h3(xi
13,d)+g
2









,
(8)
θ i
d = tan−1
(
hi
1(xi
11,d)cψi
d +hi
2(xi
12,d)sψi
d
hi
3(xi
13,d)+g
)
,
(9)
where
hi
n(xi
1n,d) = ¨xi
1n,d(t)+hi
n1 ˙xi
1n,e(t) + hi
n2xi
1n,e(t),
xi
1n,e(t) = xi
1n,d(t)−xi
1n(t), and Re{λ | λ 2 +hi
n1λ +hi
n2 =
0} < 0, n = 1, 2, 3, i = 0, 1, ..., N. Here hi
n1, hi
n2, n = 1, 2,
3 reflects the dynamics of the desired pose.
The objectives of this paper to search for indoor tar-
get using a cascade connected UAVs in Fig. 1 are summa-
rized as follows: i) To make Xi
1(t) track Xi−1
1
(t) in a finite-
time, the connected following error between present and

## Page 4

Disturbance-observer-based Finite-time Following Control With Wind Resistance Capability for Multiple ...
3085
Fig. 1. The 3D poses following control of multiple indoor
UAVs.
follower UAVs (7), which is connected with (5) and (6),
is designed. ii) Besides the existing dynamic uncertainties
(i.e., f(Xi,t) and gi( ˜ui) −ui(t)), extra uncertainties, e.g.,
wind gusts, turbulence caused by ground effect, are tack-
led by the proposed disturbance observer-based finite-time
following control with wind resistance capability (DO-
FTFC-WRC). It includes equivalent control to tackle the
newly designed task and compensate for the estimated dis-
turbance and switching control to tackle extra uncertain-
ties for enhancing the robust performance. iii) As well as
the stability analysis, the simulations and experiments of
the multi-UAV following control with/without extra wind
are compared among the DO-FTFC-WRC, DO-FTFC-
WRC without disturbance estimation and compensation,
and LL-PID-FC.
3.
DESIGN OF DO-FTFC-WRC
In this section, mathematical preliminaries, design of
DO-FTFC-WRC, and stability analysis, are presented.
3.1.
Mathematical preliminaries
Lemma 1 [16]: Given a dynamic system ˙x(t) = f(x)
with x(t) ∈Rn and f(x(t0)) = 0. A continuously differ-
ential scalar variable L(t) ≥0 is assumed to satisfy the
inequality
˙L(t)+η1L(t)+η2Lη3(t) ≤0, ∀t0 ≤t, 0 ≤L(t0),
(10)
where 0 ≤η1, 0 < η2, 0 < η3 < 1. Then,







L1−η3(t0 ≤t < t1)
=
nn
η1L1−η3(t0)+η2

e−η1(1−η3)(t−t0)o
−η2
o
/η1,
L(t1 ≤t) = 0,
(11)
where t1 ≤t0 + ln{1 + η1L1−η3(t0)/η2}/[η1(1 −η3)]. In
addition, the larger η1 or η2 or η3, the smaller L(t) and t1.
Lemma 2 [38]: From (7), si(t) = 0 ⇔σ i(t) = 0, i = 1,
2, ..., N.
Proof: As i = N, and σ N+1(t) = 0, then sN(t) = 0 ⇔
σ N(t) = 0 from (7). Continuing i = N −1 and σ N(t) =
0 gives sN−1(t) = 0 ⇔σ N−1(t) = 0. Finally, i = 1 and
σ 2(t) = 0 yields s1(t) = 0 ⇔σ 1(t) = 0.
□
3.2.
Design of DO-FTFC-WRC
The overall system control block diagram is first pre-
sented in Fig. 2. Besides the uncertaintiesf i(Xi,t), the to-
tal dynamic uncertainties, including sensor noises, input
fault/constraint, and other disturbances, are described as
follows (see (34)):
˘f i(t) = Ci
3{−Hi[gi( ˜ui)−u(t)+ f(Xi,t)]
+Ci
2d[sgn(ei)αi]/dt|ei=0}
−Ci+1
2
d[sgn(ei+1)αi+1]/dt|ei+1=0.
(12)
The following disturbance observer is first designed.
˙Pi(t) = Li{Xi−1
2
(t)−X
i
2(t)−Hi[ui(t)+ ˆf i(Xi,t)]
−˙di(t)+[Ci
1 +αiCi
2sgn(ei)αi−1]ei(t)},
(13)
ˆf i(Xi,t) = Pi(t)−Liσ i(t),
(14)
where Pi(t) is the auxiliary variable, Li ∈ℜ6×6is the ob-
server gain. Define the disturbance observer error as
˜f i(Xi,t) = ˘f i(Xi,t)−ˆf i(Xi,t).
(15)
Taking time-derivative of both sides of (14) yields
˙ˆf
i
(Xi,t) = LiHi[f i(Xi,t)−ˆf i(Xi,t)−∆f i(Xi,t)],
(16a)
where
∆f i(Xi,t) = −˘f i(t)+[Hi]
−1{−Hi[g
i( ˜ui)−ui(t)
+ f i(Xi,t)]+Ci
2d[sgn(ei)αi]/dt|ei=0}.
(16b)
From (12), ∆f i(Xi,t) becomes small ifCi
3 ≈[Hi]−1 (see
Table 2). Then, ˙˜f
i(Xi,t) is achieved from (15) and (16).
˙˜f
i(Xi,t) = ˙˘f
i
(Xi,t)−LiHi  ˘f i(Xi,t) −∆f i(Xi,t)

.
(17)
Fig. 2. Block diagram of multi-UAV, i = 1, 2, ..., N by the
DO-FTFC-WRC.

## Page 5

3086
Chih-Lyang Hwang, Cheng-Yi Li, and Chen-Wei Wu
Based on the stability analysis of the closed-loop sys-
tem (e.g., (34)), the totally uncertain dynamics (18) is
achieved as follows:
Φi(t) = 2[ ˙˘f
i
(Xi,t)+LiHi∆f i(Xi,t)]TQi ˜f i(Xi,t)
+(si(t))T ˜f i(Xi,t).
(18)
From (5)-(7), (15)-(17), the (18) is assumed to satisfy the
following upper bound:
∥Φi(t)∥≤δ i
1∥si(t)∥
1+β i
+δ i
2∥si(t)∥
2,
(19)
where 0 < δ i
1, δ i
2, and 0 < β i < 1. The inequality (19)
reveals that even ∥si(t)∥≪1, its upper bound is not too
small. Equations (18) and (19) do not require bounded
disturbance derivatives or the constrained high-frequency
measurement noise [37].
Finally, we design the DO-FTFC-WRC for UAV i as
ui(t) = ui
eq(t)+ui
sw(t),
(20)
where
ui
eq(t) = (Hi)
−1{Xi−1
2
(t)−Xi
2(t)−˙di(t)
+[Ci
1 +αiCi
2sgn(ei)αi−1]ei(t)}
−[Ci
3Hi]
−1{−ˆf
i(Xi,t)+ ˙e
i+1
(t)+C
i+1
1 ei+1(t)
+αi+1Ci+1
2
sgn(ei+1)αi+1−1ei+1(t)},
(21)
ui
sw(t) = [Ci
3Hi]
−1{Ki
1(∥si∥)si(t)+Ki
2(∥si∥)si(t)
·∥si(t)∥
β i−1/(∥si(t)∥
1+β i
+ µi)}/(1−υi).
(22)
Here µi > 0 is a boundary layer; sgn(ei)αi−1, i = 1, 2, ..., N
are the diagonal matrices; [Ci
3Hi]−1 exists; and Ki
1(∥si∥),
Ki
2(∥si∥) > 0 ∈R6×6 are the nonlinear gain designed as
follows:
Ki
1(∥si∥) = [κi
11 +κi
12∥si(t)∥
β i−1]I6 > 0,
(23)
Ki
2(∥si∥) = [κi
21 +κi
22∥si(t)∥
2β i
]I6 > 0,
(24)
where κi
11 > δ i
2 +αi/2 > 0, κi
12 > δ i
1 > 0, κi
21 > 0, κi
22 >
β i/2β i > 0, and αi > 0. As ∥si(t)∥≪1, a larger switch-
ing gain Ki
1(∥si∥) is applied to obtain the robustness. In
contrast, a constrained control input can be attenuated by
appropriate switching gains, i.e., κi
12 and κi
22 in (23) and
(24), when∥si(t)∥≫1 [16]. These two constants κi
11 >
δ i
2 +αi/2 > 0, κi
12 > δ i
1 > 0 must be larger than those up-
per bounds of totally dynamic uncertainties (19) to guar-
antee the properties of finite-time convergence. Further-
more, uncertain ∆ui
sw(t) caused by the input constraint and
fault gi( ˜ui)−ui(t) satisfies the inequality
∥(ui
sw(t))†∆ui
sw(t)∥< υi < 1, ∀t,
(25)
where
ui
sw(t))† = [(ui
sw(t))Tui
sw(t)]−1(ui
sw(t))T
is
the
pseudo- inverse of ui
sw(t).
Remark 1: Since disturbance observer is an auxiliary
role, i.e., ˆf i(Xi,t) in ui
eq(t) (21), for the proposed DO-
FTFC-WRC. Its observer gain can be assigned as a small
value. Additionally, its suitable value can be achieved by
simulation results. After that, the successful experiments
will be achieved.
3.3.
Stability analysis
The following-control system including totally uncer-
tain dynamics by the DO-FTFC-WRC is discussed as fol-
lows:
Theorem 1: Given the dynamics of (1)-(3) with the
designed disturbance observer (14) and (15). The totally
uncertain dynamics and the uncertain control gain satisfy
the upper bound inequality (19) and the condition (25),
respectively. The DO-FTFC-WRC (20)-(24) is designed,
and then the operating point converges in finite-time to-
ward the connected following error (7) with the convex
set Ds:
Ds = {si(t), i = 1, 2, ..., N | ∥si(t ≥t1)∥= 0}, (26)
where
t1 ≤t0 +ln{1+α
′L1−γ
s
(t0)/β
′
}/[α
′(1−bγ)],
(27)
α = min
1≤i≤N{αi}, β = min
1≤i≤N{2−β iβ i}, γ = min
1≤i≤N{β i},
0 < α
′,β
′, 0 < α
′ ≤α −α
′, 0 < β
′
≤β −β
′.
(28)
Here Ls(t) = ∑N
i=1 [si(t)]Tsi(t)/2 and t0 is an initial time.
Then, {si(t), σ i(t), Xi(t), ˆf(Xi,t), ui(t), i = 1, 2, ..., N}
are uniformly ultimately bounded (UUB). In addition, the
convergence of following error (6) is obtained by the fol-
lowing equation:
De = {ei(t), i = 1, 2, .., N | ∥ei(t ≥t2)∥= 0},
(29)
where
t2 ≤t1 ln{1+αe(Le)1−γe(t1)/βe}/[αe(1−γe)],
(30)
Le(t) =
N
∑
i=1
ei(t)Tei(t)/2, ei(t) =
Z t
t0
ei(τ)dτ,
(31)
0 < αe ≤2λmin1≤i≤N {Ci
1}, αm = min1≤i≤N{αi} > 0,
γe = (1+αm)/2, 0 < β e ≤2γeλmin1≤i≤N{Ci
2}.
(32)
Proof: The following Lyapunov function is first consid-
ered.
L = Ls +Lo,
(33)
where Ls = ∑N
i=1 (si)Tsi/2, Lo = ∑N
i=1 ( ˜f i)TQi ˜f i, and 0 <
Qi. Taking the time derivative of L along with substituting
(1), (5)-(7), (12)-(18), (20), and (21) yields
˙L = ˙Ls + ˙Lo

## Page 6

Disturbance-observer-based Finite-time Following Control With Wind Resistance Capability for Multiple ...
3087
=
N
∑
i=1
(si)T{Ci
3{˙ei +[Ci
1 +αiCi
2sgn(ei)αi−1]ei
+Ci
2d[sgn(ei)]/dt|ei=0}
−{˙ei+1 +[αi+1Ci+1
2
sgn(ei+1)αi+1−1]ei+1
+Ci+1
2
d[sgn(ei+1)]/dt|ei+1=0}}
+
N
∑
i=1
{( ˙˜f
i)TQi ˜f i +( ˜f i)TQi ˙˜f
i}
=
N
∑
i=1
(si)T{Ci
3[Xi−1
2
−Xi
2
−Hi(ui +gi −ui + f i)
+[Ci
1 +αiCi
2sgn(ei)αi−1]ei}
+Ci
2d[sgn(ei)]/dt|ei=0
−{˙ei+1 +[αi+1Ci+1
2
sgn(ei+1)αi+1−1]ei+1
+Ci+1
2
d[sgn(ei+1)]/dt|ei+1=0}}
−
N
∑
i=1
{( ˜f i)T[(LiHi)
TQ
i +Qi(LiHi)] ˜f i}
+
N
∑
i=1
2( ˙˘f
i
+LiHi∆i)TQi ˜f i
=
N
∑
i=1
(si)T{−Ci
3Hi(ui
sw +∆ui
sw)+ ˘f i −ˆf i)}
+
N
∑
i=1
2( ˙˘f
i
+LiHi∆i)TQi ˜f i,
(34)
where the uncertain ∆ui
sw is caused by the input constraint
and fault of gi( ˜ui)−ui. Since [(LiHi)TQ
i +Qi(LiHi)] > 0,
substituting (19) into (34) obtains
˙L ≤
N
∑
i=1
{−(si)TCi
3Hiui
sw(I6 +(ui
sw)†∆ui
sw)}
+
N
∑
i=1
{δ i
1∥si∥
1+β i
+δ i
2∥si∥
2}.
(35)
Substituting the switching control (22)-(24) into (35)
yields
˙L ≤−
N
∑
i=1
{∥Ki
2∥∥si∥
1+β i
/(∥si∥
1+β i
+ µi)
+∥Ki
1∥∥si∥
2 −δ i
1∥si∥
1+β i
−δ i
2∥si∥
2}
≤−
N
∑
i=1
Γ(∥si∥){κi
11 +κi
12∥si∥
β i−1
·(∥si∥
1+β i
+ µi)(κi
21 +κi
22∥si∥
2β i
)∥si∥
β i−1
−(∥si∥
1+β i
+ µi)(δ i
1 +δ i
2∥si∥
1−β i
)},
(36)
where
0 < Γ(∥si∥) = ∥si∥
1+β i
/[∥si∥
1+β i
+ µi] < 1,
as ∥si∦= 0.
(37)
Since Ls = ∑N
i=1 ∥si∥2/2, Lbγ
S ≤
R N
i=1 ∥si∥2β i
/2β i, γ =
min1≤i≤N{β i}, κi
11 > δ i
2+αi/2 > 0, κi
12 > δ i
1 > 0, κi
21 > 0,
and κi
22 > β i/2β i > 0, (36) is simplified as follows [13]:
˙L ≤−
N
∑
i=1
{αi∥si∥
2/2+2−β iβ i∥si∥
2β i
}
≤−αLs −βLγ
s ≤0,
(38)
where 0 < α, β, 0 < γ < 1 are described in (26). Based
on (1), (5)-(7), (14)-(15), and (20)-(24), {si, σ i, Xi, ˆf i,
ui, i = 1, 2, ..., N} are UUB. Since only the finite-time
approach of the connected following error is needed, the
item Ls is investigated. Since {si, ˆf i, i = 1, 2, ..., N} con-
verge and are bounded, their time-derivatives of quadratic
terms must not be larger than zero before inside a convex
set, i.e., ˙Ls, ˙Lo ≤0, as t ≤t1 ≤ts, where t1 is the maximum
finite-time convergence of all UAVs. Since Ls ≥0, there
exist 0 < α
′, β
′, 0 < α
′ ≤α −α
′, and 0 < β
′
≤β −β
′
such that
˙Lo +α
′Ls +β
′Lγ
s = 0, as t ≤ts.
(39)
Substituting (39) into (38) yields
˙Ls +α
′Ls +β
′
Lγ
s ≤˙Ls +(α −α
′)Ls +(β −β
′)Lγ
s
≤˙Ls + ˙Lo +[αLs +βLγ
s] ≤0,
as t ≤ts.
(40)
Based on (40) and Lemma 1, the finite-time convergence
to si = 0, i = 1, 2, ..., N with the Ds of (26)-(28) is at-
tained. Together with Lemma 2, σ i = 0, i = 1, 2, ..., N are
achieved.
Next, the Lyapunov functionLe = ∑N
i=1 ei(t)Tei(t)/2,
where ei(t) =
R t
t0 ei(τ)dτ is applied to verify the zero fol-
lowing error in finite time. Rewrite (5) as
ei = σ i −Ci
1ei −Ci
2sgn(ei)αi.
(41)
Taking the time derivative of Le and substituting (41)
with σ i(t ≥t1) = 0 based on Lemma 2 and (26) achieves
˙Le =
N
∑
i=1
[ei]
Tei = −
N
∑
i=1
[ei]
T[Ci
1ei +Ci
2sgn(ei)αi]. (42)
Since
∥ei∥1 ≥∥ei∥
and
αm = min1≤i≤N{αi} > 0,
−∥ˆei∥αi
2 ≤−∥ei∥αi
1 ≤−∥sgn(ei)αm∥1 is obtained. Then,
the following inequalities are achieved
˙Le ≤−λmin1≤1≤N{Ci
1}
N
∑
i=1
∥ei∥
2
−λmin 1≤1≤N{Ci
2}
N
∑
i=1
∥ei∥
1+αm

## Page 7

3088
Chih-Lyang Hwang, Cheng-Yi Li, and Chen-Wei Wu
≤−αeLe −βeLbγee ≤0,
(43)
where 0 < γe < 1, and 0 < αe, βe, αm are given in (32).
Based on (43) and Lemma 1, the zero following error in
finite time (29)-(32) is attained.
□
3.4.
DO-FTFC-WRC algorithm
The DO-FTFC-WRC algorithm is given in Table 1.
4.
SIMULATIONS AND DISCUSSIONS
In Fig. 1, leader UAV tracks the desired 3D pose and
two follower UAVs are set. Their input faults are set as
ρi
2(t) = 0.8+0.1sin(0.2t), bi
1 = 0.2,
as 0 s ≤t ≤2.5 s,
ρi
1(t) = 0.85+0.1sin(0.2t), bi
6 = −0.1,
as 10 s < t ≤12.5 s,
ρi
4(t) = 0.85+0.1sin(0.2t),
as 30 s < t ≤32.5 s.
(44)
The other durations are ρi
j(t) = 1 and bi
j(t) = 0, j = 1,
2, ..., 6, i = 1, 2, 3. The system uncertainties of f i(Xi,t)
are assumed as
f i
1(Xi,t) = χ cos(0.5txi
11)+2χ sin(5txi
11xi
16),
f i
2(Xi,t) = χ cos(0.2txi
12)+2χ sin(2txi
12xi
15),
f i
3(Xi,t) = χ cos(0.6txi
13)+2χ sin(txi
13xi
14),
f i
4(Xi,t) = χ cos(0.5txi
14)+2χ sin(4txi
14xi
13),
f i
5(Xi,t) = χ cos(0.4txi
15)+2χ sin(5txi
15xi
12),
f i
6(Xi,t) = χ cos(0.8txi
16)+2χ sin(4txi
16xi
11),
(45)
where χ = 1.75. The virtual leader ˆX0
1 (t) = [x0
11,d
x0
12,d
x0
13,d x0
16,d]T is assigned as follows:
ˆX0
1 (t) =
Table 1. The DO-FTFC-WRC of UAV i, i = 1, 2, ..., N.
Input: X j
1(t) and X j
2(t), j = i−1, i, i+1;
Output: ui(t) is the input acceleration of UAV i.
1)
Consider UAV i with input fault and constraint
(1)-(3).
2)
Construct the connected following error (7) by the
nonlinear filtering following error (5), following
error (6), and virtual leader (4). Their suitable
parameters are set.
3)
Built the disturbance observer (15) by (14) and
suitable observer gain Li.
4)
Assign the nonlinear switching gains (23) and (24)
with appropriate parameters.
5)
Finally, the DO-FTFC-WRC ui(t) in (20) is
achieved by ui
eq(t) and ui
sw(t) in (21) and (22),
respectively.








0 0.3t 2 90◦T ,
0 s ≤t < 10 s,

0 3 2 90◦−9◦(t −10)

,
10 s ≤t < 30 s,

0 3−0.3(t −30) 2 −90◦
,
30 s ≤t < 40 s.
(46)
Here
X0
1 (t) =
h
X
0
1(t)T x0
15,d(t) x0
16,d(t)
iT
,
where
x0
14,d(t) and x0
15,d(t) depend on X
0
1(t). The relative
pose between the leader and follower 1 is set as
d2(t) =

x12 y12 0 0◦0◦0◦T;
similarly,
d3(t) =

x23 y23 0 0◦0◦0◦T is the relative pose between
followers 1 and 2. Their heights are 2 m.

























(x12, y12) = (x23, y23) = (0, 2.5),
as 0 s ≤t < 10 s,
(x12, y12) = (x23, y23)
= (2.5cos(π(1−0.05t)), 2.5sin(π(1−0.05t)),
as 10 s ≤t < 30 s,
(x12, y12) = (x23, y23) = (0, −2.5),
as 30 s ≤t < 40 s.
(47)
The Xi
1(0), i = 1, 2, 3 are set as (0, 0, 2.5, 0, 0, 90◦), (0,
−2.5, 2.5, 0, 0, 90◦), and (0, −5, 2.5, 0, 0, 90◦), respec-
tively. The response under the input fault of (33) and the
uncertainties given in (34) by the control and observer pa-
rameters of Table 2 is shown in Fig. 3.
Based on the Orange Cube of UAV, the constrained
accelerations 9.8, 9.8, 9.8 m/s2, 6.11π/s2, 6.11π/s2,
and 3π/s2 are assigned. To verify the effectiveness of
disturbance-observer based finite-time following control,
the response of Fig. 3 case without disturbance compen-
sation is presented in Fig. 4. Their performances are given
in Tables 3 and 4.
The important observations of Figs. 3, 4 and Tables 3,
4 are abridged as follows: i) Based on Tables 3 and 4,
the average (position error, orientation error) is respec-
tively (0.033 m, 0.0395 rad) with disturbance compen-
sation and (0.0446 m, 0.0387 rad) without disturbance
compensation. Alternatively, the disturbance compensa-
Table 2. Control and observer parameters for i = 1, 2, 3.
Parameter
Value
Ci
1, Ci
2, Ci
3, Hi, Li
0.01I6, 0.025I6, 2.5I6, 0.5I6, 0.5I6
αi, β i, µi, υi, hi
n1, hi
n2
0. 5, 0.45, 0.1, 0.1, 0.1, 0.1
K1
1(∥s1∥)
[18+0.5∥s1(t)∥
β1−1
K1
2(∥s1∥)
[0.8+0.01∥s1(t)∥
2β1]I6
K2
1(∥s2∥)
[28+0.5∥s2(t)∥
β2−1]I6
K2
2(∥s2∥)
[0.8+0.01∥s2(t)∥
2β2]I6
K3
1(∥s3∥)
[40+0.5∥s3(t)∥
β3−1]I6
K3
2(∥s3∥)
[0.8+0.01∥s3(t)∥
2β3]I6

## Page 8

Disturbance-observer-based Finite-time Following Control With Wind Resistance Capability for Multiple ...
3089
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
Fig. 3. Response of three UAVs with input fault (44) and uncertainties (45) for the following task of (46) and (47) by the
proposed DO-FTFC-WRC.

## Page 9

3090
Chih-Lyang Hwang, Cheng-Yi Li, and Chen-Wei Wu
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
Fig. 4. Response of Fig. 3 case without disturbance compensation (e.g., [1]).

## Page 10

Disturbance-observer-based Finite-time Following Control With Wind Resistance Capability for Multiple ...
3091
Table 3. 3D pose error of Fig. 3 case.
3D pose
UAV i
1
2
3
Average
X (m)
0.0348
0.0474
0.0380
0.0401
Y (m)
0.0426
0.0367
0.0277
0.0357
Z (m)
0.0265
0.0247
0.0184
0.0232
/0 (rad)
0.0398
0.0292
0.0272
0.0321
θ (rad)
0.0334
0.0283
0.0205
0.0274
ψ (rad)
0.0655
0.0692
0.0426
0.0591
Table 4. 3D pose error of Fig. 4 case.
3D pose
UAV i
1
2
3
Average
X (m)
0.0361
0.0381
0.0395
0.0379
Y (m)
0.0752
0.0620
0.0479
0.0617
Z (m)
0.0397
0.0332
0.0297
0.0342
/0 (rad)
0.0417
0.0318
0.0307
0.0347
θ (rad)
0.0340
0.0282
0.0195
0.0272
ψ (rad)
0.0684
0.0544
0.0401
0.0543
tion improves 26% in position error but slightly deterio-
rates 2% in orientation error (or 0.0458◦). It reveals that
the average orientation errors with and without distur-
bance compensation are almost the same. ii) The max-
imum position error and orientation error in 3 axes are
smaller than 0.1 m and 0.4 radian, respectively. They oc-
cur during the initial time, i.e., transients, and aren’t much
affected for real implementation. iii) The huge system un-
certainties (18) confirm the superiority of our DO-FTFC-
WRC. iv) As the estimated disturbance isn’t compensated,
the disturbances are increased (cf. Figs. 3(h) and 4(h)). v)
Since the desired 3D pose and its velocity are low-pass
features, the implementation of high-frequency accelera-
tion doesn’t have adverse effect.
5.
EXPERIMENTS AND DISCUSSION
There are three subsections: one is experimental prelim-
inaries, environment, and results.
5.1.
Experimental preliminaries
Three quadrotors for the following control are depicted
in Fig. 5. The distances between motor axes, the diame-
ters, the heights, propeller, the weights and KV values for
Leader, Follower 1, and Follower 2 are respectively the
same as 380 mm, 420 mm, 200 mm, 6.5 inch, 1.4 kg, and
1400. The KV value represents the value of speed (rpm)
increase for every 1 volt increases in voltage. The blush
motors are SDMODEL A2212 with the input voltage of
11.1 volt. Four electronic speed controllers (ESCs) are in
the middle of each crossbar. For GPS-denied environment,
Lidar range finder [28] and optical sensor [34] substitute
(a) Leader.
(b) Follower 1.
(c) Follower 2.
Fig. 5. The three quadrotors.
Fig. 6. Experimental block diagram of signal transmis-
sion.
for GPS. To connect all onboard computing unit, the mo-
bile router TP-Link 4G LTE Mobile Wi-Fi M7200 is used
to create a WiFi hotspot to connect all Jetson NXs with
WLAN. In addition, 3D poses and velocities of leader and
two follower UAVs are transmitted by WiFi module. For
more multi-UAV, mesh WiFi can be considered.
The edge computing is the NVIDIA Jetson Xavier NX
with the following specifications: i) GPU: NVIDIA Volta
architecture with 384 NVIDIA CUDA® cores and 48 Ten-
sor cores; ii) CPU: 6-core NVIDIA Carmel ARM® v8.2
64-bit CPU 6 MB L2 + 4 MB L3; iii) DL Accelerator: 2x
NVDLA Engines; iv) Memory: 8 GB 128-bit LPDDR4x
@ 51.2GB/s; v) Connectivity: Gigabit Ethernet, M.2 Key
E (WiFi/BT included), M.2 Key M (NVMe); vi) USB: 4x
USB 3.1, USB 2.0 Micro-B; vii) Others: GPIO, I2C, I2S,
SPI, UART; viii) Dimension: 103×90.5×34.66 mm.
The block diagram for the following control of three
UAVs is depicted in Fig. 6. The corresponding signal
transmissions are explained as follows: i) At the outset,
their embedded processors (i.e., orange cube) of Leader,
Follower 1, and Follower 2 are connected with Teleme-
try (915 MHz) modules. ii) Each UAV possesses different
Mavlink System ID such that UART modules of Mavlink
Protocol can connect with specific UAV. iii) In contrast,
ground station (GS) can communicate with the mobile
router TP-Link 4G LTE Mobile Wi-Fi M7200 to connect
all NX units with WLAN. Simultaneously, GS can give
the command to Leader for a planned task.
5.2.
Experimental environment
The experimental environment is the indoor sport field
of National Taiwan University of Science and Technology

## Page 11

3092
Chih-Lyang Hwang, Cheng-Yi Li, and Chen-Wei Wu
Fig. 7. Experimental environment: indoor sport field of
NTUST.
Table 5. Wind speed by an electrical fan for different dis-
tances.
Distance (m)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Speed (m/s)
6.55
4.63
3.58
3.03
2.63
2.55
2.40
(a) Lidar range finder.
(b) Optical sensor.
Fig. 8. Positioning sensors in GPS-defined region.
(NTUST) (see Fig. 7). Its dimension of W ×L×H is about
25 m × 35 m × 15 m. The relationship between the wind
speed by an electrical fan for different distance is listed in
Table 5.
Remark 2: The wind speed increased over 10 mph (or
4.47 m/s) can be called a wind gust. Our experiment is not
only wind by electric fan but also flight wind caused by
ground effect.
The Lidar range finder in Fig. 8(a) can achieve an ac-
curate and fast response for the height of quadrotor. Its
important specifications are as follows: i) Range: 0-40
m. ii) Accuracy: ±2.5 cm for range over 1 m. iii) Port:
I2C or PWM. On the other hand, the important specifica-
tions optical sensor PX4 Flow in Fig. 8(b) are described
as follows: i) It uses the feature points on neighborhood of
ground pattern to calculate the relative motion of UAV. ii)
Its CPU is 32bit Arm® Cortex®- M4F, 168 MHz, 128 KB
memory, 64 KB RAM. iii) Its photo sensor MT9V034 has
a resolution of 752×480. iv) Input voltage 5 V, dimension
45.5 mm ×35 mm. v) Three-axes gyro L3GD20. Since the
ground patter of sport field is too uniform, plastic cloth is
laid on it (see Fig. 9) to improve the position accuracy by
Fig. 9. Plastic pattern laid on the ground.
the detection of moving pattern.
In summary, the EKF-fused Lidar range finder/optical
sensor and IMU for the localization of quadrotor is
achieved and verified by Fig. 10, which commands a
single quadrotor with 0.25 m/s in the 3D pose (ground
truth). The performance in Fig. 10 is abridged as fol-
lows: Average and maximum position error = (0.09 m,
0.31 m), rolling angle φ = (10.5◦, 29.4◦), pitching an-
gle θ = (9.4◦, 27.2◦), yaw angle ψ = (5.9◦, 27.86◦). It
is excellent and reliable. The experimental video can re-
fer to https://youtu.be/u_FbUFrVqk8. The corresponding
3D position error is better than that using low frequency
of mechanical antenna average position error 0.45 m in 10
m × 10 m region [32]. It confirms the effectiveness of our
Lidar range finder and optical sensor to achieve excellent
positioning in GPS-defined region.
5.3.
Experimental results
The experiment of Fig. 3 is shown in Fig. 11. The re-
sponse of Fig. 11 case using LL-PID-FC is presented in
Fig. 12. For comparisons, the responses of Figs. 11 and
12 with extra wind condition, which is achieved by an
electrical fan (see Fig. 7) with the blowing speed in Ta-
ble 5 toward the turning motion center (see experimental
video), are presented in Figs. 13 and 14, respectively. The
following pose errors of Figs. 11-14 are also summarized
in Table 6.
5.4.
Discussions
Finally, the important comments of Figs. 3, 11-14, and
Table 6 are summarized as follows:
i) In comparison to Fig. 3 and Figs. 11, 12, the exper-
imental responses are slightly oscillatory due to the
existence of various uncertainties (e.g., sensor noises,
ground effect because of indoor environment, and in-
put faults; cf. Figs. 3(g), 3(h), 11(g), 11(h), 12(e)).
Furthermore, the responses of Z-axis of DOFFT-
WRC are much better than those of the LL-PID-FC

## Page 12

Disturbance-observer-based Finite-time Following Control With Wind Resistance Capability for Multiple ...
3093
(a) 3D postion.
(b) 3D orientation.
Fig. 10. Dynamic localization of a quadrotor [25].
Table 6. Compared performances of average following er-
ror including position error (m) / orientation error
(rad) between DO-FTFC-WRC and LL-PID-FC.
UAV
Method
DO-FTFC-WRC
LL-PID-FC
w/ wind
w/o wind
w/ wind
w/o wind
Leader
0.043
/0.039
0.042
/0.040
0.089
/0.024
0.077
/0.028
Follower 1
0.138
/0.033
0.122
/0.033
0.139
/0.035
0.097
/0.032
Follower2
0.095
/0.045
0.094
/0.046
1.868
/0.099
0.637
/0.059
(cf. Figs. 11(c), 13(c) and 12(c), 14(c)).
ii) In Table 6 without extra wind condition, the position
error of Leader UAV by the DO-FTFC-WRC is 0.035
m (or 45.5%) better than that of the LL-PID-FC; its
position error of Follower 2 is 0.543 m (or 85.2%)
much better than that of LL-PID-FC. Nevertheless,
its position error of Follower 1 is 0.025 m (or 20.5%)
slightly poorer than that of the LL-PID-FC. In total,
the average position error of the DO-FTFC-WRC is
36.7% better than that of the LL-PID-FC. In addition,
their average orientation error is the same as 0.0397
radian (or 2.27 degrees).
iii) In Table 6 with extra wind conditions, the position er-
ror of Leader UAV by the DO-FTFC-WRC is 0.046 m
(or 51.7%) better than that of LL-PID-FC; its position
error of Follower 2 is also 1.773 m (or 94.9%) much
better than that of LL-PID-FC. However, its position
error of Follower 1 is 0.001 m (or 0.72%) slightly bet-
ter than that of the LL-PID-FC. In total, the average
position error of the DO-FTFC-WRC is 49.1% bet-
ter than that of the LL-PID-FC. It indicates that the
performance of the DO-FTFC-WRC with extra wind
condition not only has absolute performance (i.e., im-
provement from 0.184 m to 0.6067 m) but also rela-
tive performance (i.e., improvement from 36.7% to
49.1%). Furthermore, their average orientation error
of the DO-FTFC-WRC is 0.0104 radian (or 0.6 de-
gree or 19.8%) better than that of the LL-PID-FC (i.e.,
improvement from 0.05267 to 0.04233 radian).
iv) The disturbance observer with extra wind condition
(cf. Fig. 13(h)) is indeed larger than that without extra
wind condition (cf. Fig. 11(h)). It confirms the effec-
tiveness of the designed disturbance observer.
v) The experimental videos of Figs. 11-14 are at https:
//youtu.be/sbWTuB8C6Zk, https://youtu.be/u6QgRry
HCjk, https://youtu.be/QLox8Vn4LF4, and https://yo
utu.be/BPSKfsI8Rp0.
6.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE STUDIES
In this paper, a disturbance-observer-based finite-time
following control with wind resistance capability (DO-
FTFC-WRC) for the GPS-denied multiple UAVs with sen-
sory noises, input fault/constraint, extra wind condition,
and other uncertainties, is designed to perform a time-
varying 3D pose’s following task. Due to the inner-loop
PID control with the quaternion for coordinate transfor-
mation and the EKF fused Lidar range finder/optical sen-
sor and IMU in each UAV, the nonlinear complex dynam-
ics of the original UAV is not required, and the control
behavior of UAV is improved. Under these circumstances,
its outer loop is modeled as a second-order system with the
above unknown dynamic uncertainties. Not only does the
nonlinear switching gain in switching control augments as
its connected following error is near zero to attain its quick
finite-time following ability, but also the above dynamic
uncertainties are online estimated by disturbance observer
and then compensated by equivalent control. We summa-
rize that the average position errors with and without ex-
tra wind conditions of the DO-FTFC-WRC are 49.1% and
36.7% better than those of LL-PID-FC. Likewise, the av-

## Page 13

3094
Chih-Lyang Hwang, Cheng-Yi Li, and Chen-Wei Wu
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
Fig. 11. Experimental responses by the proposed DO-FTTC-WRC without extra wind gusts.

## Page 14

Disturbance-observer-based Finite-time Following Control With Wind Resistance Capability for Multiple ...
3095
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Fig. 12. Experimental responses by the low-level PID following control without extra wind gusts.
erage orientation errors with and without extra wind con-
ditions of the DO-FTFC-WRC are respectively 19.8% bet-
ter than and the same as those of the LL-PID-FC.
In future, we will address these topics: i) the follow-
ing control of 5G network-based hexa-rotor and quadro-
tors, ii) distributed disturbance-observer-based bipartite
formation-change finite-time tracking control of net-
worked multi-UAV, iii) machine learning based distributed
UWB network or visual human action recognition with
application to human-UAV interactions [39].
DECLARATIONS
Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Authors’ Contributions
i) C.-L. Hwang: Conceptualization; theory derive; task
assignment.
ii) C.-Y. Li and C.-W. Wu: Experimental setup; pro-
gressing experiments; data analysis; response plots.

## Page 15

3096
Chih-Lyang Hwang, Cheng-Yi Li, and Chen-Wei Wu
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
Fig. 13. Experimental responses by the proposed DO-FTTC-WRC with extra wind gusts.

## Page 16

Disturbance-observer-based Finite-time Following Control With Wind Resistance Capability for Multiple ...
3097
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Fig. 14. Experimental responses by the low-level PID following control with extra wind gusts.
Funding
This work was supported by Projects from the National
Science and Technology Council at Taiwan with Grant
No. NSTC 113-2622-E-011-011 and NSTC 112-2221-E-
011-100-MY2.
REFERENCES
[1] D. Liu, H. Liu, F. L. Lewis, and Y. Wan, “Robust fault-
tolerant formation control for tail-sitters in aggressive flight
mode transitions,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Infor-
matics, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 299-308, 2020.
[2] D. N. Das, R. Sewani, J. Wang, and M. K. Tiwari, “Syn-
chronized truck and drone routing in package delivery lo-
gistics,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation
Systems, vol. 22, no. 9, pp. 5772-5782, 2021.
[3] K. Guo, C. Liu, X. Zhang, X. Yu, Y. Zhang, L. Xie, and
Lei Guo, “A bio-inspired safety control system for UAVs
in confined environment with disturbance,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Cybernetics, vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 1308-1320, 2024.
[4] F. Jiang, F. Pourpanah, and Q. Hao, “Design, implementa-
tion, and evaluation of a neural-network-based quadcopter
UAV system,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electron-
ics, vol. 67, no. 3, pp. 2076-2085, 2020.

## Page 17

3098
Chih-Lyang Hwang, Cheng-Yi Li, and Chen-Wei Wu
[5] Y. Xie, X. Yu, Y. Shi, and L. Guo, “SPT-based composite
hierarchical antidisturbance control applied to a quadrotor
UAV,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol.
70, no. 1, pp. 635-645, 2023.
[6] P. K. Muthusamy, B. Suthar, R. Muthusamy, M. Garratt,
H. Pota, L. Seneviratne, and Y. Zweiri, “Self-organizing
BFBEL control system for a UAV under wind disturbance,”
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 71, no. 5,
pp. 5021-5033, 2024.
[7] Y. Yang, S. Gorbachev, B. Zhao, Q. Liu, Z. Shu, and D.
Yue, “Predictor-based neural attitude control of a quadrotor
with disturbances,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Infor-
matics, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 169-177, 2024.
[8] P. Yue, J. Xin, Y. Zhang, Y. Lu, and M. Shan. “Semantic-
driven autonomous visual navigation for unmanned aerial
vehicles,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics,
vol. 71, no. 11, pp.14853-14863, Nov. 2024.
[9] M. Samir, S. Sharafeddine, C. M. Assi, T. M. Nguyen, and
A. Ghrayeb, “UAV trajectory planning for data collection
from time-constrained IoT devices,” IEEE Transactions on
Wireless Communication, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 34-46, 2020.
[10] D. Liu, W. Bao, X. Zhu, B. Fei, T. Men, and Z. Xiao, “Co-
operative path optimization for multiple UAVs surveillance
in uncertain environment,” IEEE Internet of Things Jour-
nal, vol. 9, no. 13, pp. 10676-10692, 2022.
[11] C.-L. Hwang, “Fuzzy fixed-time following control for mul-
tiple UAVs with input fault and saturation,” International
Conference on Advanced Robotics and Intelligent Systems
(ARIS), Taipei, Taiwan, Aug. 29-Sep. 1, pp. 1-6, 2023.
[12] G. Raja, S. Essaky, A. Ganapathisubramaniyan, and Y.
Baskar, “Nexus of deep reinforcement learning and leader
–follower approach for AIoT enabled aerial networks,”
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 19, no.
8, pp. 9165-9172, 2023.
[13] B. S. Chen, C. P. Wang, and M. Y. Lee, “Stochastic robust
team tracking control of multi-UAV networked system un-
der Wiener and Poisson random fluctuations,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Cybernetics, vol. 51, no. 12, pp. 5786-5799,
2021.
[14] Z. Yu, Y. Zhang, B. Jiang, J. Fu, Y. Jin, and T. Chai, “Com-
posite adaptive disturbance observer-based decentralized
fractional-order fault-tolerant control of networked UAVs,”
IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, Cybernetics: Sys-
tems, vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 799-813, 2022.
[15] Y. Zou, H. Zhang, and W. He, “Adaptive coordinated for-
mation control of heterogeneous vertical takeoff and land-
ing UAVs subject to parametric uncertainties,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Cybernetics, vol. 52, no. 5, pp. 3184-3195,
2022.
[16] C.-L. Hwang and H. B. Abebe, “Generalized and hetero-
geneous nonlinear dynamic multiagent systems using on-
line RNN-based finite-time formation tracking control and
application to transportation systems,” IEEE Transactions
on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 23, no. 8, pp.
13708-13720, 2022.
[17] Z. Yu, Y. Zhang, B. Jiang, C.-Y. Su, J. Fu, Y. Jin, and T.
Chai, “Enhanced recurrent fuzzy neural fault-tolerant syn-
chronization tracking control of multiple unmanned air-
ships via fractional calculus and fixed-time prescribed per-
formance function,” IEEE Transactions on Fuzzy Systems,
vol. 30, no. 10, pp. 4515-4529, 2022.
[18] B. Yang, H. Li, D. Yao, and W. Meng, “DO-based adap-
tive consensus control for multiple MUAVs with dynamic
constraints,” IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, Cyber-
netics: Systems, vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 2387-2398, 2023.
[19] T. Yin, Z. Gu, and X. Xie, “Observer-based event-triggered
sliding mode control for secure formation tracking of
multi-UAV systems,” IEEE Transactions on Network Sci-
ence Engineering, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 887-898, 2023.
[20] D. Yao, S. Gorbachev, C. Dou, X. Xie, and D. Yue, “Adap-
tive tracking consensus control of nonlinear multiagent
systems with predefined accuracy under disturbance ob-
server,” IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, Cybernetics:
Systems, vol. 53, no. 7, pp. 4267-4278, 2023.
[21] F. Liu, S. Yuan, W. Meng, R. Su, and L. Xie, “Multiple
noncooperative targets encirclement by relative distance-
based positioning and neural antisynchronization control,”
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 71, no.
2, pp. 1675-1685, 2024.
[22] Y. Yu, C. Chen, J. Guo, M. Chadli, and Z. Xiang, “Adaptive
formation control for unmanned aerial vehicles with col-
lision avoidance and switching communication network,”
IEEE Transactions on Fuzzy Systems, vol. 32, no. 3, pp.
1435-1445, 2024.
[23] Y. Zhou, Y. Chen, L. Zhang, and C. Pan, “Distributed finite-
time prescribed performance for multiple unmanned aerial
vehicles with time-varying external disturbance,” IEEE In-
ternet of Things Journal, vol. 11, no. 9, pp. 16969-16980,
2024.
[24] Z. Du, H. Zhang, Z. Wang, and H. Yan, “Model predic-
tive formation tracking-containment control for multi-UAV
with obstacle avoidance,” IEEE Transactions on Systems,
Man, Cybernetics: Systems, vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 3404-3414,
2024.
[25] X.-J. Peng, Y. He, and J. Shen, “Time-varying formation
tracking control of multi-leader multiagent systems with
sampled-data,” IEEE Transactions on Automation Science
Engineering, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 3182-3192, 2024.
[26] K. Ze, W. Wang, K. Liu, and J. Lü, “Time-varying for-
mation planning and distributed control for multiple UAVs
in clutter environment,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial
Electronics, vol. 71, no. 9, pp. 11305-11315, 2024.
[27] Z. Du, H. Zhang, Z. Wang, and H. Yan, “Synchronous
position-attitude loop regulation-based distributed optimal
trajectory tracking control for multi-UAV formation with
external disturbances,” IEEE Transactions on Systems,
Man, Cybernetics: Systems, vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 7445-7456,
2024.
[28] Y. Cui, Y. Liang, Q. Luo, Z. Shu, and T. Huang, “Re-
silient consensus control of heterogeneous multi-UAV sys-
tems with leader of unknown input against Byzantine at-
tacks,” IEEE Transactions on Automation Science Engi-
neering, vol. 22, pp. 5388-5399, 2025.

## Page 18

Disturbance-observer-based Finite-time Following Control With Wind Resistance Capability for Multiple ...
3099
[29] M. Zhang, H. Wang, Y. Lun, Z.Yang, and Y. Wang, “Multi-
UAV efficient cooperative forest fire patrol in 3-D moun-
tain environments,” IEEE Transactions on Aerospace Elec-
tronic Systems, pp. 1-23, 2025.
[30] C.-L. Hwang, T.-Y. Wu, and S.-E. Pu, “Specific human
following by residual-bi-LSTM-based distributed module
UWB network and residual-RNN-based finite-time con-
trol,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 20,
no. 3, pp. 4052-4064, 2024.
[31] R. Xu, D. Tian, and Z. Wang, “Adaptive disturbance
observer-based local fixed-time sliding mode control with
an improved approach law for motion tracking of piezo-
driven microscanning system,” IEEE Transactions on In-
dustrial Electronics, vol. 71, no. 10, pp. 12824-12834,
2024.
[32] Z. Lv, Q. Zhao, X.-M. Sun, and Y. Wu, “Finite-time control
design for a coaxial tilt-rotor UAV,” IEEE Transactions on
Industrial Electronics, vol. 71, no. 12, pp. 16132-16142,
December 2024.
[33] S. Yun, Y. J. Lee and S. Sung, “IMU vision Lidar integrated
navigation system in GNSS denied environments,” Proc. of
IEEE Aerospace Conference, Big Sky, MT, USA, pp. 1-10,
02-09 March 2013.
[34] PX4FLOW, https://docs.px4.io/v1.11/zh/sensor/px4flow.html.
[35] Y. Cui, C. Wang, Q. Hu, B. Xu, X. Song, Z. Yuan, and
Y. Zhu, “A novel positioning method for UAV in GNSS-
denied environments based on mechanical antenna,” IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 71, no. 10, pp.
13461-13471, 2024.
[36] I. Lopez-Sanchez, J. Moyrón, and J. Moreno-Valenzuela,
“Adaptive neural network-based trajectory tracking outer
loop control for a quadrotor,” Aerospace Science Technol-
ogy, vol. 129, 107847, 2021.
[37] K. Li, and Y. Li. Disturbance-observer adaptive fuzzy per-
formance constraint control for vehicular platoon system,”
IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics:
Systems, vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 2462-2470, April 2024.
[38] C.-L. Hwang, C. C. Chiang, and Y. W. Yeh, “Adaptive
fuzzy hierarchical sliding-mode control for the trajectory
tracking of uncertain under-actuated nonlinear dynamic
systems,” IEEE Transactions on Fuzzy Systems, vol. 22, no.
2, pp. 286-297, 2014.
[39] C.-L. Hwang, F. Guanwan, and C. H. Chen, “Squeeze-
excitation transformer with residual bi-GRU model for dis-
tributed UWB based continuous gesture recognition and its
application to human-UAV interactions,” IEEE Open Jour-
nal of the Computer Society, vol. 6, pp. 1077-1089, 2025.
Chih-Lyang Hwang received his Ph.D.
degree in 1990. He was a Professor in
the Department of Electrical Engineering,
Tamkang University before 2011. Dur-
ing 2011-2025, he was a Professor with
the Department of Electrical Engineer-
ing, National Taiwan University of Sci-
ence and Technology (NTUST), Taipei,
Taiwan. During 1998-1999, he was a Vis-
iting Scholar at the George W. Woodruff School of Mechani-
cal Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA,
USA. He was also a Visiting Scholar at Electrical and Com-
puter Engineering of Auburn University, Alabama, USA During
2016-2017. At present, he is a Research Fellow of Intelligent
Robot Center of NTUST. He is the author or co-author of high-
impact journal and conference papers in the related field. His cur-
rent research interests include robotics, fuzzy neural modeling,
classification and control, finite-time control, (distributed) visual
or wireless localization or navigation systems, nonlinear multi-
agent systems, remote control of UAV, face and speech emo-
tion recognition, and human-robot interactions. From Google
scholar, his total citations are over 3362 with H-index 29. Dr.
Hwang was the recipient of the Excellent and Outstanding Re-
search Awards from the National Taiwan University of Science
and Technology, in 2018, 2022 and 2019, 2024, respectively. He
is also selected as top 2% most influential scientists in “Career
1960-2024”, “Single 2021”, and “Single 2022” by Stanford Uni-
versity.
Cheng-Yi Li received his B.E. degree
from Chang Gung University, Taoyuan,
Taiwan, in 2021, and an M.E. degree from
the National Taiwan University of Science
and Technology, Taipei, in 2024, both in
electrical engineering. His research inter-
ests include robotics and computation in-
telligence.
Chen-Wei Wu received his B.E. degree
from National Taiwan Normal University
in 2021 and an M.E. degree from the Na-
tional Taiwan University of Science and
Technology, Taipei, Taiwan, in 2024, both
in electrical engineering. His research in-
terests include robotics and computation
intelligence.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard
to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affil-
iations.
