# s13369-025-10742-5.pdf

## Page 1

Arabian Journal for Science and Engineering
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13369-025-10742-5
RESEARCH ARTICLE-MECHANICAL ENGINEERING
Finite-Time Adaptive Dynamic Surface Control of a Quadrotor with
Input Delay
Muhammad Maaruf1
┬Ę Abdulrazaq Na’¼üu Abubakar2 ┬Ę Muhammad Majid Gulzar2,3,4 ┬Ę Arun Bali5
Received: 1 February 2025 / Accepted: 8 October 2025
┬® The Author(s) 2025
Abstract
This paper presents ’¼ünite-time adaptive multi-dimensional Taylor network (MTN)-based dynamic surface control (DSC)
for attitude and position control of a quadrotor subjected to input delay, parametric uncertainties, and external disturbances.
The input delay is compensated using the Pade approximation approach. Due to the simple structure, low computation, and
excellent approximation capability of the MTN, it is employed to approximate the uncertain nonlinearities of the quadrotor
system. The MTN is updated using a single parameter instead of a vector of many weights to simplify it further. An improved
DSC strategy is employed to achieve the attitude and position tracking of the quadrotor in ’¼ünite time. Different from the
traditional ’¼ürst-order ’¼ülter of the DSC, a modi’¼üed ’¼ürst-order ’¼ülter is proposed such that it not only prevents the ŌĆ£explosion
of complexityŌĆØ problem associated with the conventional backstepping approach but also utilizes extra terms to guarantee
’¼ünite-time convergence and estimates and compensates the problem of boundary layer error. Thus, the assumption that the
maximum bound of the derivative of the virtual control law is known is no longer required. The gains of the DSC are updated
online so that proper gains are adapted in response to the change in the reference trajectories to improve the tracking accuracy.
Lyapunov candidate function is used to prove the ’¼ünite-time convergence of the closed-loop system to a compact set. Finally,
numerical simulations have been provided to demonstrate the advantages of the improved DSC scheme.
Keywords Quadrotor ┬Ę Sliding mode control ┬Ę Backstepping ┬Ę Delay ┬Ę Multi-dimensional Taylor network ┬Ę Dynamic surface
control
Abdulrazaq Na’¼üu Abubakar, Muhammad Majid Gulzar and Arun Bali
contributed equally to this work.
B Muhammad Maaruf
m.maaruf23@imperial.ac.uk
Abdulrazaq Na’¼üu Abubakar
g202204960@kfupm.edu.sa
Muhammad Majid Gulzar
muhammad.gulzar@kfupm.edu.sa
Arun Bali
arunbali1106@gmail.com
1
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering,
Imperial College London, London sw7 2AZ, UK
2
Department of Control and Instrumentation Engineering,
King Fahd University for Petroleum and Minerals, Dhahran
31261, Saudi Arabia
3
Center for Sustainable Energy Systems, King Fahd University
for Petroleum and Minerals, Dhahran 31261, Saudi Arabia
1 Introduction
Quadrotors belong to the class of unmanned aerial vehi-
cles (UAV) extensively used in inspection, mapping, rescue
mission, maritime cruising, military surveillance, aerial cine-
matography, and so on [1, 2]. They are lighter in weight, have
a simple structure, capable of vertical take-up and landing,
hovering, and performing rapid maneuvering with greater
agility [3].
In recent years, quadrotors have received great attention
from researchers with a view to enhancing their operations
via control. However, quadrotors pose serious challenges due
to their strongly coupled nonlinear dynamics, multi-input
multi-output, unmodeled dynamics, time-varying parame-
4
Center for Smart Mobility and Logistics, King Fahd
University for Petroleum and Minerals, Dhahran 31261,
Saudi Arabia
5
Department of Mathematics, Central University of Jammu,
Jammu, Jammu and Kashmir 181143, India
123

## Page 2

Arabian Journal for Science and Engineering
ters, and susceptibility to disturbances [4]. Furthermore, the
quadrotors are underactuated systems that have six degrees
of freedom with just four actuators [5, 6]. Hence, it is dif’¼ücult
to control the coupled nonlinear and underactuated quadrotor
UAV.
Various control methods have been put forward to over-
come the challenges. In [7], a robust approach using a ’¼üxed-
time sliding mode control has been designed for a quadrotor
aircraft. An adaptive sliding mode controller with improved
disturbance suppression capability has been implemented for
a quadrotor in [8, 9]. In [10], a sliding mode control method
has been presented to tackle complex quadrotor control situ-
ations by identifying fault vectors and computing suitable
control inputs. In [11], a novel backstepping-based fault-
tolerant control system has been developed and tested on
a quadrotor UAV testbed in the presence of actuator faults.
Maaruf et al. [12] studied the trajectory tracking problem
of a quadrotor using an adaptive robust sliding mode and
backstepping control. In [13], the quadrotor control design
improves the tracking accuracy and robustness of the pro-
posed integrated backstepping sliding mode control. In [14],
the study provides a backstepping sliding mode control for
the attitude tracking of a quadrotor in the presence of mod-
eling errors and wind perturbations.
Recently, the application of dynamic surface control
(DSC) for trajectory tracking of quadrotors is attracting the
attention of researchers. The DSC utilizes a low-pass ’¼ülter to
estimate the derivative of the virtual control law to prevent
the ŌĆ£explosion of complexityŌĆØ associated with the traditional
backstepping control strategy. In [15], the authors proposed
DSC and adaptive dynamic programming to achieve the tra-
jectory control of a quadrotor. In [16], an observer-based
DSC of a quadrotor with external disturbances has been stud-
ied. In [17], an adaptive DSC was designed for a quadrotor
with parametric uncertainties and a slung load. In [18, 19],
an adaptive DSC with a neural network was designed for
a quadrotor subjected to parametric uncertainties. In [20],
an adaptive neural observer-based DSC of a quadrotor with
input hysteresis has been studied. Considering the low vol-
ume of DSC strategies applied to the quadrotors recently, it is
still open for more investigations to enhance its performances
which is the motivation of this work.
In the ’¼éight control system of quadrotors, time delays arise
in the control inputs as a result of latency of computation
and communication, and aging [21]. Numerous studies have
been undertaken to address the control challenges faced by
quadrotor systems that are subjected to time delays. In [22],
a model reference adaptive control was proposed for the lin-
earized dynamic model of the quadrotor. In [23], a nonlinear
dynamics inversion control integrated with a lead compen-
sator was designed for a quadrotor with input delay. In [24],
backstepping control with a nonlinear disturbance observer
was proposed for a quadrotor with input delay and exter-
nal disturbances. In [25], a barrier Lyapunov function-based
backstepping control has been utilized to control the ver-
tical position of a quadrotor with input delay. In [26], the
authors designed an integral backstepping control for posi-
tion and rotation control of a quadrotor with input delay. In
[27], a fractional-order backstepping control of a quadro-
tor with input delay was investigated. It should be noted that
these control methods are based on asymptotic stability. This
implies that the quadrotors subjected to time delay achieve
trajectory tracking as the time approaches in’¼ünity. This could
compromise the tracking accuracy of the quadrotors and is
undesirable. Thus, how to design a controller with guaran-
teed convergence within a short ’¼ünite time for a quadrotor
with a time-delay issue is another motivation for this work.
Finite-time control strategies guarantee the attainment
of the control objectives with ’¼ünite-time stability contrary
to asymptotic stability which guarantees the realization
of the control objectives as time approaches in’¼ünity [28].
Finite-time control strategies offer some advantages such
as improved robustness, rapid convergence to the target
trajectories, and enhanced tracking accuracy. Several ’¼ünite-
time control techniques have been reported for quadrotors
[29ŌĆō34]. For example, the authors in [28] introduce an adap-
tive ’¼ünite-time backstepping control technique enabling a
quadrotor to follow speci’¼üed trajectories accurately. In [35],
a ’¼ünite-time control of a quadrotor with state constraints has
been studied. An adaptive ’¼ünite-time backstepping approach
has been used for the trajectory tracking of a quadrotor
with external disturbances in [28, 36]. In [37], a ’¼ünite-
time backstepping sliding mode control has been designed
for a quadrotor with parametric uncertainties. In [38], a
global sliding mode control strategy with ’¼ünite-time con-
vergence property has been employed for trajectory tracking
of an uncertain quadrotor. In [39], an adaptive ’¼ünite-time
fractional-order sliding mode control of a quadrotor with
unknown parameters has been studied. It is obvious that
there exist a plethora of ’¼ünite-time sliding mode control and
’¼ünite-time backstepping control techniques applied to the
quadrotors, but a ’¼ünite-time DSC of a quadrotor is not widely
discussed.
The’¼ürst-order’¼ültersintheexistingDSCstrategiesapplied
to quadrotors [15ŌĆō20] have the problem of boundary layer
errors. The boundary layer errors lead to a large tracking
error bound, which affects the control accuracy. Therefore,
it is essential to modify the ’¼ürst-order ’¼ülter by incorporating
more terms so that it not only prevents the problem of ŌĆ£explo-
sion of complexityŌĆØ but also compensates for the effect of the
boundary layer errors without requiring any knowledge about
their upper bounds, thereby enhancing the tracking accuracy
of the DSC. The existing DSC strategies and their corre-
sponding ’¼ürst-order ’¼ülters [15ŌĆō20] are based on asymptotic
convergencewhichpromptstheneedtoimprovetheirconver-
gence speed in the presence of environmental disturbances
123

## Page 3

Arabian Journal for Science and Engineering
using the ’¼ünite-time stability theorem. Moreover, the gains of
the DSC [15ŌĆō20] are ’¼üxed for all maneuvers. However, con-
sidering that environmental disturbances are unpredictable
and quadrotors can perform high and low maneuvers, using
’¼üxed gains under these conditions may lead to unsatisfactory
control performance. Therefore, the controller gains should
be adaptive so that they can automatically adjust accordingly
in response to changes in target maneuvers and environ-
mental disturbances to improve robustness. In addition, the
DSC strategies [15, 18ŌĆō20] utilize neural networks to esti-
mate the uncertain nonlinearities. Nonetheless, most neural
networks have major drawbacks such as complex structure,
high computational requirements, low ef’¼üciency, and long
training period, which may give rise to poor real-time perfor-
mance. Thus, it is essential to employ a simple but effective
approximationtechnique, suchas themulti-dimensional Tay-
lor network (MTN) to replace the neural networks. The MTN
has some critical characteristics such as simple structure, few
parameters, fast convergence speed, and excellent approx-
imation ability [40, 41]. Meanwhile, the use of the MTN
to approximate the uncertain nonlinearities of a quadrotor
is rare. Therefore, it is of utmost importance to study the
’¼ünite-time DSC with an adaptive MTN and a modi’¼üed ’¼ürst-
order ’¼ülter to improve the trajectory tracking accuracy of the
quadrotor with input delay.
Motivated by the literature discussions, this paper pro-
poses an MTN-based improved DSC with adjustable gains
and a modi’¼üed ’¼ürst-order ’¼ülter to guarantee the conver-
gence of the quadrotor with input delay in a short ’¼ünite
time. Addressing these problems simultaneously is dif’¼ücult
and has not been investigated before. The challenge brought
by the input delay is addressed using the Pade approxi-
mation. The next challenge uses the MTN to approximate
the unknown parameters and the external disturbances of
the quadrotor. The MTN is updated using a single adaptive
parameter to lower its computational cost. Another challenge
in the control design is modifying the ’¼ürst-order ’¼ülter of
the DSC with extra terms to tackle not only the ŌĆ£explo-
sion of complexityŌĆØ but also to mitigate the effect caused
by the boundary layer error using adaptive laws, and guaran-
tee ’¼ünite-time convergence. Thus, the prior knowledge of the
upper bound of the boundary layer error is not required. The
gains of the DSC are updated online so they can self-adjust
whenever the target trajectories change. The proof process to
demonstrate the ’¼ünite-time boundedness of the closed-loop
system under the proposed control is tedious. The important
contributions of the proposed control scheme are summa-
rized as
follows:
1. This is the ’¼ürst paper to investigate an adaptive ’¼ünite-
time MTN-based improved DSC with a modi’¼üed ’¼ürst-
order ’¼ülter for the trajectory tracking of a quadrotor with
input delay. The Pade approximation approach is used to
mitigate the input delay.
2. Different from the widely employed neural network
approximations for adaptive control of quadrotors [15,
18ŌĆō20], this paper uses the MTN-based approximation
for the quadrotor. Contrary to neural network approxima-
tions,theMTNiseasiertoimplementinpracticeandhasa
simplestructurewithpolynomialsinthehiddenlayer,fast
convergence, and excellent approximation capability. To
further simplify the MTN and reduce the computational
cost, a single adaptive parameter is updated instead of the
weight vector.
3. Unlike the DSC approaches in [15ŌĆō20], the ’¼ürst-order
’¼ülter of the DSC is modi’¼üed with additional terms so
that it adaptively mitigates the problem of boundary layer
error and ensures convergence in ’¼ünite time. Thus, prior
information about the upper bounds of the derivatives of
virtual control law is no longer required. This improves
the estimation accuracy of the low-pass ’¼ülter and the
accuracyofthetrajectorytracking.Furthermore,adaptive
laws are used to adjust the DSC gains online whenever the
desired trajectories change. This allows the DSC to reg-
ulate the quadrotor with the appropriate gains for every
operation.
Therestofthearticleisorganizedasfollows.InSect.2,the
nonlinear mathematical model of the quadrotor is presented.
In Sect. 3, the design steps of the enhanced DSC strategy are
presented. The simulation results and performance compar-
ison with existing techniques are discussed in Sect. 4. Some
concluding remarks are provided in Sect. 5.
2 Mathematical Modeling
The schematic diagram of the quadrotor is presented in Fig.
1. The description as well as the mathematical modeling of
quadrotors has been extensively studied in the literature[13,
24]. The state space dynamic equations describing the six-
degree-of-freedom quadrotor are formulated based on the
standard quadrotor model in [24], extended to incorporate
time-delay effects following the approach in [13] as:
123

## Page 4

Arabian Journal for Science and Engineering
Fig. 1 Schematic diagram of the quadrotor [24]
ŌÄ¦
ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ©
ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ®
╦Öx1 = x2
╦Öx2 = a1x4x6 + a2x4 + a3x2
2 + b1U1(t ŌłÆ╬╣)
╦Öx3 = x4
╦Öx4 = a4x2x6 + a5x2 + a6x2
4 + b2U2(t ŌłÆ╬╣)
╦Öx5 = x6
╦Öx6 = a7x2x4 + a8x2
6 + b3U3(t ŌłÆ╬╣)
╦Öx7 = x8
╦Öx8 = a9x8 + (Cx2Cx5Sx3 + Sx2 Sx5)
┬»U4(tŌłÆ╬╣)
m
╦Öx9 = x10
╦Öx9 = a10x10 + (Cx2 Sx3 Sx5 + Cx5Sx2)
┬»U4(tŌłÆ╬╣)
m
╦Öx11 = x12
╦Öx12 = ŌłÆg + a11x12 + (Cx2Cx3)
┬»U4(tŌłÆ╬╣)
m
(1)
where x1, x3, and x5 denote the roll, pitch, and yaw orien-
tations, respectively, x7, x9, and x11 indicate the quadrotor
position. a1 = JyŌłÆJz
Jx
, a2 = r Jr
Jx , a3 = ŌłÆKaŽå
Jx
, a4 = JzŌłÆJx
Jy
,
a5 = r Jr
Jy , a6 = ŌłÆKa╬Ė
Jy , a7 = JxŌłÆJy
Ji
, a8 = ŌłÆKaŽł
Jz
, a9 = ŌłÆKdx
m
,
a10 = ŌłÆKdy
m
, a11 = ŌłÆKdz
m , b1 =
L
Jx , b2 =
L
Jy , b3 =
L
Jz ,
m is total quadrotor mass, g denote the gravity constant,
Jx, Jy, Jz represent the quadrotor moment of inertia, Kax,
Kay, Kaz, KaŽå, Ka╬Ė, and KaŽł are the drag constants, U1,
U2, and U3 are the roll, pitch, and yaw inputs, respectively,
┬»U4 is the altitude control signal, and K p and Cd are the aero-
dynamic constants.
The false inputs are de’¼üned by [24]
ŌÄ¦
ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ©
ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ®
U4(t ŌłÆ╬╣) = (Sx2 Sx5 + Sx3Cx2Cx5)
┬»U4(tŌłÆ╬╣)
m
U5(t ŌłÆ╬╣) = (Sx2Cx5 + Sx3 Sx5Cx2)
┬»U4(tŌłÆ╬╣)
m
U6(t ŌłÆ╬╣) = (Cx2Cx3)
┬»U4(tŌłÆ╬╣)
m
┬»U4(t ŌłÆ╬╣) = m

U 2
4 (t ŌłÆ╬╣) + U 2
5 (t ŌłÆ╬╣) + U 2
6 (t ŌłÆ╬╣)
(2)
The following equation is obtained by substituting (2) into
(1).
ŌÄ¦
ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ©
ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ®
╦Öx1 = x2
╦Öx2 = f1 + b1U1(t ŌłÆ╬╣)
╦Öx3 = x4
╦Öx4 = f2 + b2U2(t ŌłÆ╬╣)
╦Öx5 = x6
╦Öx6 = f3 + b3U3(t ŌłÆ╬╣)
╦Öx7 = x8
╦Öx8 = f4 + b4U4(t ŌłÆ╬╣)
╦Öx9 = x10
╦Öx9 = f5 + b5U4(t ŌłÆ╬╣)
╦Öx11 = x12
╦Öx12 = f6 + b6U4(t ŌłÆ╬╣)
(3)
where
f1 = a1x4x6 + a2x4 + a3x2
2, f2 = a4x2x6 + a5x2 + a6x2
4
f3 = a7x2x4 + a8x2
6, f4 = a9x8, f5 = a10x10,
f6 = a11x12 ŌłÆgb4 = 1, b5 = 1, b6 = 1
For the purpose of control design, (3) can be simpli’¼üed as
follows:

╦Öx2iŌłÆ1 = x2i
╦Öx2i = fi + biUi(t ŌłÆ╬╣)
(i = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6)
(4)
The uncertain nonlinear functions fi (i = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6)
will be approximated with the aid of an MTN updated
via adaptive learning. To compensate for the input delays
in (4), the Laplace transform and Pade approximation are
introduced.ConsideringtheLaplacetransformanddelaythe-
orem, one gets [42, 43]:
L{Ui(t ŌłÆ╬╣)} = exp(ŌłÆ╬╣s)L(Ui(t)) = exp(ŌłÆ╬╣s/2)
exp(╬╣s/2) L(Ui(t))
123

## Page 5

Arabian Journal for Science and Engineering
Using the Pade approximation method, one has
exp(ŌłÆ╬╣s)L(Ui(t)) Ōēł(1 ŌłÆ╬╣s/2)
(1 + ╬╣s/2)L{Ui(t)}
where s represents the Laplace variable in frequency domain
and L{Ui(t)} is the Laplace transform of Ui(t).
For small time delay, the Pade approximation error
exp(ŌłÆ╬╣s) ŌłÆ(1 ŌłÆ╬╣s/2)/(1 + ╬╣s/2) is close to zero. An inter-
mediate variable Žć2iŌłÆ1 is introduced and
1 ŌłÆ╬╣s/2
1 + ╬╣s/2L{Ui(t)} = L {Žć2iŌłÆ1(t)} ŌłÆL{Ui(t)}
(5)
Simplifying (5) yields
2L{Ui(t)} = L {Žć2iŌłÆ1(t)} + ╬╣s
2 L {Žć2iŌłÆ1(t)}
(6)
The Laplace transform of (6) gives
╦ÖŽć2iŌłÆ1 = 4
╬╣ Ui ŌłÆ2
╬╣ Žć2iŌłÆ1
(7)
Equation (7) can be rewritten as
╦ÖŽć2iŌłÆ1 = 2╬╗Ui ŌłÆ╬╗Žć2iŌłÆ1
(8)
where ╬╗ = 2/╬╣.
Finally, the (4) can be transformed as follows:
ŌÄ¦
ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ©
ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ®
╦Öx2iŌłÆ1 = x2i
╦Öx2i = fi + bi

Žć2iŌłÆ1 ŌłÆUi(t)
	
╦ÖŽć2iŌłÆ1 = 2╬╗Ui ŌłÆ╬╗Žć2iŌłÆ1
(i = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6)
(9)
2.1 Multi-Dimensional Taylor Network
The MTN is made up of three layers: the input, middle, and
output layers as shown in Fig 2. The middle layer consists
of the polynomial combination of inputs, which are easy to
adjust. For more details on MTN, the reader is urged to see
[40, 41]. Any continuous nonlinear function can be approx-
imated with MTN as follows:
where s1, ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę , sn are the input of MTN.
fMTN(s) = W T 	(s)
(10)
where s = [s1, ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę , sn]T Ōłłn ŌŖéRn is the input vector,
W = [w1, ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę , wl]T ŌŖéRl is the weight vector, and 	(s)
Fig. 2 The architecture of MTN [41]
is the vector of the polynomial combination of inputs and is
constructed as follows:
	(s) = [s1, ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę , sn



1 term
, s2
1, ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę , s2
n



2 term
, ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę , sm
1 , ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę , sm
n



m term
]T ŌŖéRl
(11)
where n is the dimension vector of the input layer and ll is
the dimension of the middle layer.
Remark 1 Each element of the vector 	(s) is given by
n
i, j=1 sŽāi
i s
Žā j
j , where Žāi and Žā j are nonnegative integers and
1 ŌēżŽāi + Žā j Ōēżm holds.
Lemma 1 [44] For any variable y and constants ╬Ą, 0 < ╬│ <
1, and 0 < p < 1, the following relation holds:
ŌłÆy(y + ╬Ą)╬│ ŌēżŌłÆ1 ŌłÆp
1 + ╬│ y1+╬│ +
╦ć╬Ą
1 + ╬│
(12)
where
╦ć╬Ą = ╬Ą1+╬│ +

╬Ą
1 ŌłÆ(1 ŌłÆp)1/(1+╬│ 
1+╬│
+

╬Ą(1 ŌłÆp)1/(1+╬│ )
1 ŌłÆ(1 ŌłÆp)1/1+╬│
1+╬│
(13)
123

## Page 6

Arabian Journal for Science and Engineering
Lemma 2 [45] For any nonlinear system ╦Öx = F(x), if there
exists positive constants n1 > 0, n2 > 0, n3 > 0, and 0 <
╬│ < 1, and a Lyapunov function L(x) satisfying ╦ÖL(x) Ōēż
ŌłÆn1L(x) ŌłÆn2V ╬│ (x) + n3, then the nonlinear system ╦Öx =
F(x) is ’¼ünite-time stable and L(x) converges to the following
residual set:
ŽÆ =

x | L(x) Ōēżmin

n3
n1(1 ŌłÆŽé),

n3
n2(1 ŌłÆŽé)
 1
╬│

(14)
The convergence time Tc is given by:
Tc Ōēżmax

t0 +
1
Žén1(1 ŌłÆ╬│ ) ln Žén1V 1ŌłÆ╬│ (t0) + n2
n2
,
t0 +
1
n1(1 ŌłÆ╬│ ) ln n1V 1ŌłÆ╬│ (t0) + Žén2
Žén2

(15)
where 0 < Žéi < 1 is a scalar.
3 Quadrotor Control Design
This section presents the design of the FTADSC for the
quadrotor to guarantee ’¼ünite-time convergence to the desired
states x2iŌłÆ1,d (i = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6) in the presence of input
delay and external disturbances. The whole control structure
is depicted in Fig. 3.
De’¼üne the tracking error of an ith subsystem as
e2iŌłÆ1 = x2iŌłÆ1 ŌłÆx2iŌłÆ1,d
(i = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6)
(16)
Then, the derivative of e2iŌłÆ1 with respect to time gives
╦Öe2iŌłÆ1 = ╦Öx2iŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ╦Öx2iŌłÆ1,d
= x2i ŌłÆ╦Öx2iŌłÆ1,d
(17)
The tracking error between x2i and the virtual controller,
x2i,d, is
e2i = x2i ŌłÆx2i,d + bi
╬╗ Žć2iŌłÆ1 (i = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6)
(18)
Remark 2 The term bi
╬╗ Žć2iŌłÆ1 is added to compensate for the
input delay similar to the approach in [42].
From (18), we have x2i = e2i + x2i,d ŌłÆbi
╬╗ Žć2iŌłÆ1 and (17)
yields
╦Öe2iŌłÆ1 = e2i + x2i,d ŌłÆbi
╬╗ Žć2iŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ╦Öx2iŌłÆ1,d
(19)
We chose the ’¼ürst positive Lyapunov function as follows:
L2iŌłÆ1 = 1
2e2
2iŌłÆ1
(i = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6)
(20)
╦ÖL2iŌłÆ1 = e2iŌłÆ1 ╦Öe2iŌłÆ1 = e2iŌłÆ1(e2i + x2i,d
ŌłÆbi
╬╗ Žć2iŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ╦Öx2iŌłÆ1,d)
(21)
The virtual controller is thus chosen as
x2i,d = ŌłÆc2iŌłÆ1e2iŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ╬║2iŌłÆ1e╬│
2iŌłÆ1 + ╦Öx2iŌłÆ1,d
(22)
where c2iŌłÆ1 and ╬║2iŌłÆ1 are positive constants. (21) is semi-
negative de’¼ünite using (22)
╦ÖL2iŌłÆ1 = ŌłÆc2iŌłÆ1e2
2iŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ╬║2iŌłÆ1e╬│ +1
2iŌłÆ1
+ e2iŌłÆ1e2i ŌłÆe2iŌłÆ1
bi
╬╗ Žć2iŌłÆ1
(23)
The time derivative of e2i in (18) gives
╦Öe2i = ╦Öx2i ŌłÆ╦Öx2i,d
= fi + bi

Žć2iŌłÆ1 ŌłÆUi(t)
	
+ ╬┤i ŌłÆ╦Öx2i,d + bi
╬╗ ╦ÖŽć2i
(24)
To eliminate the input delay, (8) is substituted into (24) as
follows:
╦Öe2i = fi + bi

Žć2iŌłÆ1 ŌłÆUi(t)
	
+ ╬┤i ŌłÆ╦Öx2i,d
+ bi
╬╗ (2╬╗Ui ŌłÆ╬╗Žć2iŌłÆ1)
= fi + biUi(t) + ╬┤i ŌłÆ╦Öx2i,d
(25)
To avoid the ŌĆ£explosion of complexityŌĆØ associated with
╦Öx2i,d in (25), x2i,d is passed through a modi’¼üed ’¼ürst-order
’¼ülter to obtain the ’¼ültered virtual controller ╦åx2i,d as follows:
╬Ąi ╦Ö╦åx2i,d + ╦åx2i,d = x2i,d ŌłÆ╬ĄiŽü╬│
i ŌłÆ╬Ąi ╦åMitanh
Žüi
╬Ąi

ŌłÆ╬Ąie2i
x2i,d(0) = ╦åx2i,d(0)
(i = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6)
(26)
╦Ö╦åMi = ╬Ąi

Žüitanh
Žüi
╬Ąi

ŌłÆŽä2i ╦åMi ŌłÆ┬»Žä2i ╦åM╬│
i

(27)
where ╬Ąi > 0 is a constant, Žüi = ╦åx2i,d ŌłÆx2i,d is the boundary
layer error, and ╦åMi is the estimate of Mi. Mi is the upper
bound of |╦Öx2i,d| which is the effect of differentiating the
boundary layer error.
The time derivative of the boundary layer error Žüi =
╦åx2i,d ŌłÆx2i,d is computed as
123

## Page 7

Arabian Journal for Science and Engineering
Fig. 3 Block diagram of the quadrotor control system
╦ÖŽüi = ╦Ö╦åx2i,d ŌłÆ╦Öx2i,d
= ╦åx2i,d ŌłÆx2i,d
╬Ąi
ŌłÆŽü╬│
i ŌłÆ╦åMitanh
Žüi
╬Ąi

ŌłÆe2i
+ ŽÆi

e2iŌłÆ1, e╬│
2iŌłÆ1, x2iŌłÆ1, ╦Öx2iŌłÆ1, x2iŌłÆ1,d, ╦Öx2iŌłÆ1,d

= ŌłÆŽüi
╬Ąi
ŌłÆŽü╬│
i ŌłÆe2i ŌłÆ╦åMitanh
Žüi
╬Ąi

+ Mi
(28)
where ŽÆi(ŌłŚ) = ŌłÆ╦Öx2i,d appears as the effect of differentiating
Žüi, |ŽÆi(ŌłŚ)| ŌēżMi, with Mi being the unknown upper bound
of ŽÆi(ŌłŚ). The modi’¼üed ’¼ülter will compensate for Mi through
the adaptive parameter ╦åMi in ’¼ünite time.
The second Lyapunov function is selected as
L2i = 1
2e2
2iŌłÆ1 + 1
2e2
2i + Žü2
i
2 +
╦£╬▓2
i
2╬▒i
+ ╦£c2
2i
2╬Ęi
+ ╦£╬║2
2i
2╬╝i
+
╦£M2
i
2╬Ąi
(29)
where ╦£╬▓i = ╦å╬▓i ŌłÆ╬▓i, ╦£╬║2i = ╦å╬║2i ŌłÆ╬║2i, and ╦£c2i = ╦åc2i ŌłÆc2i
are estimation errors, ╦å╬║2i and ╦åc2i are adaptive parameters of
the controller, ╦å╬▓i is an adaptive parameter for adjusting the
MTN, and ╬▒i > 0, ╬╝i > 0, and ╬Ęi > 0 are design constants.
The time derivative of L2i with respect to time yields
╦ÖL2i = e2iŌłÆ1 ╦Öe2iŌłÆ1 + e2i ╦Öe2i + Žüi ╦ÖŽüi +
╦£╬▓i
╬▒i
╦Ö╦£╬▓i + ╦£c2i
╬Ęi
╦Ö╦£c2i
+ ╦£╬║2i
╬╝i
╦Ö╦£╬║2i +
╦£Mi
╬Ąi
╦Ö╦£Mi
= ŌłÆc2iŌłÆ1e2
2iŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ╬║2iŌłÆ1e╬│ +1
2iŌłÆ1 + e2iŌłÆ1e2i ŌłÆbi
╬╗ e2iŌłÆ1Žć2iŌłÆ1
+ e2i( fi + biUi(t) + ╬┤i ŌłÆ╦Öx2i,d)
ŌłÆŽü2
i
╬Ąi
ŌłÆŽü╬│ +1
i
ŌłÆŽüie2i + Žüi Mi ŌłÆŽüi ╦åMitanh
Žüi
╬Ąi

+
╦£╬▓i
╬▒i
╦Ö╦å╬▓i + ╦£c2i
╬Ęi
╦Ö╦åc2i + ╦£╬║2i
╬╝i
╦Ö╦å╬║2i +
╦£Mi
╬Ąi
╦Ö╦åMi
(30)
From (30), we know that
Žüi Mi ŌłÆŽüi ╦åMitanh
Žüi
╬Ąi

= Žüi Mi
ŌłÆŽüitanh
Žüi
╬Ąi
 
╦£Mi + Mi

= MiŽüi ŌłÆMiŽüitanh
Žüi
╬Ąi

ŌłÆ╦£MiŽüitanh
Žüi
╬Ąi

(31)
where ╦£Mi = ╦åMi ŌłÆMi is the estimation error. According to
Lemma, Mi

Žüi ŌłÆŽüitanh

Žüi
╬Ąi
	
Ōēż0.2785╬Ąi Mi. Then, (31)
can be rewritten as
Žüi MiŌłÆŽüi ╦åMitanh
Žüi
╬Ąi

ŌēżŌłÆ╦£MiŽüitanh
Žüi
╬Ąi

+ 0.2785╬Ąi Mi
(32)
Using (32), (30) becomes
╦ÖL2i = ŌłÆc2iŌłÆ1e2
2iŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ╬║2iŌłÆ1e╬│ +1
2iŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ
Žü2
i
╬Ąi
ŌłÆŽü╬│ +1
i
ŌłÆŽüie2i
+ e2i

e2iŌłÆ1 + fi + ╬┤i ŌłÆbi
╬╗
e2iŌłÆ1
e2i
Žć2iŌłÆ1 + biUi ŌłÆ╦Öx2i,d

ŌłÆ╦£MiŽüitanh
Žüi
╬Ąi

+ 0.2785╬Ąi Mi
+
╦£╬▓i
╬▒i
╦Ö╦å╬▓i + ╦£c2i
╬Ęi
╦Ö╦åc2i + ╦£╬║2i
╬╝i
╦Ö╦å╬║2i +
╦£Mi
╬Ąi
╦Ö╦åMi
(33)
123

## Page 8

Arabian Journal for Science and Engineering
The nonlinear terms fi +╬┤i ŌłÆbi
╬╗
e2iŌłÆ1
e2i Žć2iŌłÆ1 can be approx-
imated with the aid of neural network as follows:
fi + ╬┤i ŌłÆbi
╬╗
e2iŌłÆ1
e2i
Žć2iŌłÆ1 = W T
i 	i(Yi) + Žāi(Yi)
(34)
Inserting (34) into (33), one has
╦ÖL2i = ŌłÆc2iŌłÆ1e2
2iŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ╬║2iŌłÆ1e╬│ +1
2iŌłÆ1 ŌłÆŽü2
i
╬Ąi
ŌłÆŽü╬│ +1
i
ŌłÆŽüie2i
+ e2i

e2iŌłÆ1 + W T
i 	i(Yi) + Žāi(Yi) + biUi ŌłÆ╦Öx2i,d
	
ŌłÆ╦£MiŽüitanh
Žüi
╬Ąi

+ 0.2785╬Ąi Mi
+
╦£╬▓i
╬▒i
╦Ö╦å╬▓i + ╦£c2i
╬Ęi
╦Ö╦åc2i + ╦£╬║2i
╬╝i
╦Ö╦å╬║2i +
╦£Mi
╬Ąi
╦Ö╦åMi
(35)
Considering YoungŌĆÖs inequalities, we get
e2i W T
i 	i(Yi) Ōēże2
2iW T
i Wi	i(Yi)T 	i(Yi)
2
+ 1
2
(36)
Remark 3 De’¼üne a scalar ╬▓i = W T
i Wi = ŌłźWiŌłźto be the
norm of the weight vector of the neural network. The scalar
╦å╬▓i will be updated online instead of the weight vector to
simplify the MTN further.
Using the inequality (36), (35) can be rewritten as follows:
╦ÖL2i = ŌłÆc2iŌłÆ1e2
2iŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ╬║2iŌłÆ1e╬│ +1
2iŌłÆ1 ŌłÆŽü2
i
╬Ąi
ŌłÆŽü╬│ +1
i
ŌłÆŽüie2i
+ e2i

e2iŌłÆ1 + e2i╬▓i	T
i 	i + Žāi + biUi ŌłÆ╦Öx2i,d
	
ŌłÆ╦£MiŽüitanh
Žüi
╬Ąi

+ 0.2785╬Ąi Mi
+
╦£╬▓i
╬▒i
╦Ö╦å╬▓i + ╦£c2i
╬Ęi
╦Ö╦åc2i + ╦£╬║2i
╬╝i
╦Ö╦å╬║2i +
╦£Mi
╬Ąi
╦Ö╦åMi
(37)
The control input for an ith subsystem of the quadrotor is
designed as
Ui =

ŌłÆe2iŌłÆ1 ŌłÆe2i ╦å╬▓i	T
i 	i ŌłÆ╦åc2ie2i ŌłÆ╦å╬║2ie╬│
2i + ╦Ö╦åx2i,d
	
/bi
(38)
The parameters of eachith control input above are updated
online using the following adaptive laws.
ŌÄ¦
ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ©
ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ®
╦Ö╦åc2i = ╬Ęi

e2
2i ŌłÆŽä2i ╦åc2i ŌłÆ┬»Žä2i ╦åc╬│
2i

╦Ö╦å╬▓i = ╬▒i

e2
2i	T
i 	i ŌłÆŽä2i ╦å╬▓i ŌłÆ┬»Žä2i ╦å╬▓╬│
i

╦Ö╦å╬║2i = ╬╝i

e╬│ +1
2i
ŌłÆŽä2i ╦å╬║2i ŌłÆ┬»Žä2i ╦å╬║╬│
2i

(39)
where Žä2i and ┬»Žä2i are design constants. Inserting (38) into
(37) gives
╦ÖL2i ŌēżŌłÆc2iŌłÆ1e2
2iŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ╬║2iŌłÆ1e╬│ +1
2iŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ
Žü2
i
╬Ąi
ŌłÆŽü╬│ +1
i
ŌłÆŽüie2i
+ e2i

ŌłÆe2i ╦£╬▓i	T
i 	i ŌłÆ(c2i + ╦£c2i)e2i ŌłÆ(╬║2i + ╦£╬║2i)e╬│
2i + Žüi
	
ŌłÆ╦£MiŽüitanh
 Žüi
╬Ąi

+
╦£╬▓i
╬▒i
╦Ö╦å╬▓i + ╦£c2i
╬Ęi
╦Ö╦åc2i +
╦£Mi
╬Ąi
╦Ö╦åMi + ╦£╬║2i
╬╝i
╦Ö╦å╬║2i
+ 0.2785╬Ąi Mi + e2iŽāi
ŌēżŌłÆc2iŌłÆ1e2
2iŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ╬║2iŌłÆ1e╬│ +1
2iŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ
Žü2
i
╬Ąi
ŌłÆŽü╬│ +1
i
ŌłÆc2ie2
2i ŌłÆ╬║2ie╬│ +1
2i
ŌłÆe2iŽüi + e2iŽüi ŌłÆ╦£╬▓i

e2
2i	T
i 	i ŌłÆ
╦Ö╦å╬▓i
╬▒i

ŌłÆ╦£c2i

e2
2i ŌłÆ
╦Ö╦åc2i
╬Ęi

ŌłÆ╦£╬║2i

e╬│ +1
2i
ŌłÆ
╦Ö╦å╬║2i
╬╝i

ŌłÆ╦£Mi

Žüitanh
 Žüi
╬Ąi

ŌłÆ
╦Ö╦åMi
╬Ąi

+ e2iŽāi + 0.2785╬Ąi Mi
(40)
Theorem 1 For the quadrotor UAV (9) under the proposed
DSCinput (38)withamodi’¼üed’¼ülter (26)andestimationlaws
given by (27) and (39), its closed-loop system is ultimately
bounded in a ’¼ünite time.
Proof Using (27) and (39), (40) becomes
╦ÖL2i ŌēżŌłÆc2iŌłÆ1e2
2iŌłÆ1 ŌłÆŽä2ie╬│ +1
2iŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ
Žü2
i
╬Ąi
ŌłÆŽü╬│ +1
i
ŌłÆc2ie2
2i ŌłÆ╬║2ie╬│ +1
2i
ŌłÆŽä2i ╦£╬▓i ╦å╬▓i ŌłÆŽä2i ╦£c2i ╦åc2i ŌłÆŽä2i ╦£╬║2i ╦å╬║2i ŌłÆŽä2i ╦£Mi ╦åMi
ŌłÆ┬»Žä2i ╦£╬▓i ╦å╬▓╬│
i ŌłÆ┬»Žä2i ╦£c2i ╦åc╬│
2i ŌłÆ┬»Žä2i ╦£╬║2i ╦å╬║╬│
2i ŌłÆ┬»Žä2i ╦£Mi ╦åM╬│
i
+ e2iŽāi + 0.2785╬Ąi Mi
(41)
Using the YoungŌĆÖs inequalities, we achieve the following
relations
ŌÄ¦
ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ©
ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ®
ŌłÆ╦£╬▓i ╦å╬▓i = ŌłÆ(╬▓i + ╦£╬▓i) ╦£╬▓i Ōēż╬▓2
i
2 ŌłÆ
╦£╬▓2
i
2
ŌłÆ╦£╬║2i ╦å╬║2i = ŌłÆ(╬║2i + ╦£╬║2i)╦£╬║2i Ōēż╬║2
2i
2 ŌłÆ╦£╬║2
2i
2
ŌłÆ╦£Mi ╦åMi = ŌłÆ(Mi + ╦£Mi) ╦£Mi ŌēżM2
i
2 ŌłÆ
╦£M2
i
2
ŌłÆ╦£c2i ╦åc2i = ŌłÆ(c2i + ╦£c2i)╦£c2i Ōēżc2
2i
2 ŌłÆ╦£c2
2i
2 ;
e2Žāi Ōēże2
2i
2 + Žā 2
i
2
(42)
From Lemma 1, we achieve the following inequalities
ŌÄ¦
ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ©
ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ®
ŌłÆ╦£╬▓i ╦å╬▓╬│
i = ŌłÆ╦£╬▓i( ╦£╬▓i + ╬▓i)╬│ ŌēżŌłÆ1ŌłÆp
1+╬│ ╦£╬▓1+╬│
i
+
╦ć╬▓i
1+╬│
ŌłÆ╦£c2i ╦åc╬│
2i = ŌłÆ╦£c2i(╦£c2i + c2iŌłÆ1)╬│ ŌēżŌłÆ1ŌłÆp
1+╬│ ╦£c1+╬│
2i
+
╦ćc2i
1+╬│
ŌłÆ╦£╬║2i ╦å╬║╬│
2i = ŌłÆ╦£╬║2i(╬║2i + ╦£╬║2i)╬│ ŌēżŌłÆ1ŌłÆp
1+╬│ ╦£╬║1+╬│
2i
+
╦ć╬║2i
1+╬│
ŌłÆ╦£Mi ╦åM╬│
i = ŌłÆ╦£Mi(Mi + ╦£Mi)╬│ ŌēżŌłÆ1ŌłÆp
1+╬│ ╦£M1+╬│
i
+
╦ćMi
1+╬│
(43)
123

## Page 9

Arabian Journal for Science and Engineering
Table 1 Control design
parameters
Parameters
Values
Parameters
Values
c1, c3, c5
7,7,7
c7, c9, c11
9,9,9
╬║1, ╬║3, ╬║5
0.5,0.5,0.5
╬║7, ╬║9, ╬║11
0.5,0.5,0.5
╬Ą1, ╬Ą2, ╬Ą3
0.2,0.2,0.2
╬Ą4, ╬Ą5, ╬Ą6
0.2,0.2,0.2
Žä1, Žä2, Žä3
0.01,0.01,0.01
Žä4, Žä5, Žä6
0.01,0.01,0.01
┬»Žä1, ┬»Žä2, ┬»Žä3
0.01,0.01,0.01
┬»Žä4, ┬»Žä5, ┬»Žä6
0.01,0.01,0.01
╬Ę1, ╬Ę2, ╬Ę3
15, 15, 15
╬Ę4, ╬Ę5, ╬Ę6
26, 26, 26
╬╝1, ╬╝2, ╬╝3
1.4, 1.4, 1.4
╬╝4, ╬╝5, ╬╝6
3, 3, 3
╬▒1, ╬▒2, ╬▒3
0.012, 0.012, 0.012
╬▒4, ╬▒5, ╬▒6
0.017, 0.017, 0.017
╬│
0.6
Fig. 4 Position response for x7,
x9, and x11
Substituting the inequalities (42) and (43) into (41), one
has
╦ÖL2i ŌēżŌłÆc2iŌłÆ1e2
2iŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ╬║2iŌłÆ1

e2
2iŌłÆ1
	 ╬│ +1
2
ŌłÆ

c2i ŌłÆ1
2

e2
2i ŌłÆ╬║2i

e2
2i
	 ╬│ +1
2
ŌłÆ
 1
╬Ąi

Žü2
i ŌłÆ

Žü2
i
	 ╬│ +1
2
ŌłÆŽä2i
╦£╬▓2
i
2 ŌłÆ┬»Žä2i
1 ŌłÆp
1 + ╬│
( ╦£╬▓2
i )
╬│ +1
2
2
ŌłÆŽä2i
╦£c2
2i
2 ŌłÆ┬»Žä2i
1 ŌłÆp
1 + ╬│
(╦£c2
2i)
╬│ +1
2
2
ŌłÆŽä2i
╦£╬║2
2i
2 ŌłÆ┬»Žä2i
1 ŌłÆp
1 + ╬│

╦£╬║2
2i
	 1+╬│
2
2
ŌłÆŽä2i
╦£M2
i
2
ŌłÆ┬»Žä2i
1 ŌłÆp
1 + ╬│

╦£M2
i
	 1+╬│
2
2
+ Žä2i
c2
2i
2 + Žä2i
a2
2iŌłÆ1
2
+ Žä2i
╬║2
2i
2
123

## Page 10

Arabian Journal for Science and Engineering
Fig. 5 Attitude angle response
for x1, x3, and x5
+ Žä2i
M2
i
2
+ ┬»Žä2i
╦ćc2i
1 + ╬│ + ┬»Žä2i
╦ć╬▓i
1 + ╬│ + ┬»Žä2i
╦ćMi
1 + ╬│ + ┬»Žä2i
╦ć╬║2i
1 + ╬│
+ 0.2785╬Ąi Mi +
Žā 2
i
2
(44)
Let
r2i = min

2c2iŌłÆ1, 2

c2i ŌłÆ1
2

, 2
 1
╬Ąi

, Žä2i, Žä2i, Žä2i, Žä2i

,
q2i = min

╬║2iŌłÆ12
╬│ +1
2 , ╬║2i2
╬│ +1
2 , 2
╬│ +1
2 ,
┬»Žä2i
2
1 ŌłÆp
1 + ╬│ .2
╬│ +1
2 , ┬»Žä2i
2
1 ŌłÆp
1 + ╬│ .2
╬│ +1
2 ,
┬»Žä2i
2
1 ŌłÆp
1 + ╬│ .2
╬│ +1
2 , ┬»Žä2i
2
1 ŌłÆp
1 + ╬│ .2
╬│ +1
2

o2i = Žä2i
c2
2i
2 + Žä2i
a2
2iŌłÆ1
2
+ Žä2i
╬║2
2i
2 + Žä2i
M2
i
2 + ┬»Žä2i
╦ćc2i
1+╬│ +
┬»Žä2i
╦ć╬▓i
1+╬│ + ┬»Žä2i
╦ćMi
1+╬│ + ┬»Žä2i ╦ć╬║2i
1+╬│ + 0.2785╬Ąi Mi + Žā 2
i
2 . Then, (44)
can be simpli’¼üed as follows:
╦ÖL2i = ŌłÆr2i L2i ŌłÆq2i L
╬│ +1
2
2i
+ o2i
(45)
According to Lemma 2, the Lyapunov function L2i con-
verges to the set L2i Ōēżmin

o2i
r2i(1ŌłÆŽé),

o2i
q2i(1ŌłÆŽé)
	
2
1+╬│

with
a convergence time of
Tc Ōēżmax

t0 +
1
Žér2i

1 ŌłÆ╬│ +1
2
	 ln Žér2i V 1ŌłÆ╬│ +1
2 (t0) + q2i
q2i
,
t0 +
1
r2i

1 ŌłÆ╬│ +1
2
	 ln
r2i V 1ŌłÆ╬│ +1
2 (t0) + Žéq2i
Žéq2i

ŌŖōŌŖö
The Quadrotor motion along x7 and x9 directions are
determined by the pitch and roll inclinations, respectively.
Therefore, the desired roll and pitch orientations are auto-
123

## Page 11

Arabian Journal for Science and Engineering
Fig. 6 Tracking errors for the
position
matically tuned by the following equations:
ŌÄ¦
ŌÄ©
ŌÄ®
x1,d = arcsin

Sx5,dU4 ŌłÆCx5,dU5

x3,d = arcsin
U4ŌłÆSx3,d Sx5,d
Cx5,d Cx3,d
	
(46)
4 Simulation Results
Forthesakeofillustratingtheef’¼ücacyoftheproposedcontrol
for the quadrotor with input delay, simulations and compar-
isons are carried out. The proposed method is compared with
adaptive DSC (ADSC) designed for an uncertain quadrotor
in [17], and disturbance observer-based backstepping (DOB)
designed for a quadrotor with input delay in [24].
The quadrotor parameters are obtained from [13]. The
initial condition of each quadrotor state is 0.001. The initial
condition of each adaptive gain of the proposed controller is
0.001. The initial condition of each adaptive parameter of the
MTN is set as 0.05. To set the middle layer of the MTN, we
set n = 2 and m = 2 according to (11), and the input vector
is chosen as si = [e2iŌłÆ1 x2iŌłÆ1]T . The design parameters of
the controllers are provided in Table 1. The input delay is
chosen as ╬╣ = 0.03. The desired trajectories of the quadrotor
are given as follows:
x7,d =
ŌÄ¦
ŌÄ¬ŌÄ©
ŌÄ¬ŌÄ®
3
5
0 Ōēżt Ōēż10
3
10
10 < t Ōēż30
3
5
30 < t Ōēż60
; x9,d =
ŌÄ¦
ŌÄ¬ŌÄ©
ŌÄ¬ŌÄ®
3
5
0 Ōēżt Ōēż20
3
10
20 < t Ōēż40
3
5
40 < t Ōēż60
x11,d =
 1
2
0 Ōēżt Ōēż50
0 50 < t Ōēż60
; x5,d =
 1
2
0 Ōēżt Ōēż60
0 20 < t Ōēż30
A parametric uncertainty of ┬▒30% is added to the system
and the time-varying external disturbances are modeled as
ŌÄĪ
ŌÄŻ
d1
d2
d3
ŌÄż
ŌÄ”=
ŌÄĪ
ŌÄŻ
2cos(2t)
2sin(0.61t)
2sin(t)
ŌÄż
ŌÄ”
The simulation results are demonstrated in Figs. 4, 5, 6,
7, 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12. From Figs. 4 and 5, it can be seen
that the proposed control scheme, ADSC, and DOB have
tracked the desired position and attitude trajectories in the
123

## Page 12

Arabian Journal for Science and Engineering
Fig. 7 Tracking errors for the
attitude angles
Table 2 Settling time of the three control techniques
Variables
Proposed (s)
DOB (s)
ADSC (s)
x1
0.91
4.30
6.11
x3
0.91
4.30
6.11
x5
0.615
3.12
5.22
x7
0.80
2.96
5.37
x9
0.80
2.96
5.37
x11
0.80
2.96
5.37
Table 3 RMSE of the three control techniques
Variables
Proposed
DOB
ADSC
x1
0.0087
0.0248
0.0403
x3
0.0094
0.0350
0.0410
x5
0.0216
0.0402
0.0622
x7
0.0202
0.0510
0.0650
x9
0.0206
0.0451
0.0626
x11
0.0194
0.0490
0.0577
Table 4 Maximum overshoots of the three control techniques
Variables (%)
Proposed (%)
DOB (%)
ADSC (%)
x1
0.0
31.1
99.4
x3
0.0
45.7
85.0
x5
0.0
24.6
0.0
x7
0.0
33.5
0.0
x9
0.0
33.9
0.0
x11
0.0
37.1
0.0
presence of input delay, parametric variations, and environ-
mental disturbances. Although the DOB can compensate for
the input delay, its asymptotic convergence property and the
presence of overshoots make its responses slower in tracking
the desired trajectories. The ADSC could neither neutralize
the effects of the input delay nor guarantee ’¼ünite-time conver-
gence, which resulted in slow responses. On the other hand,
the proposed control scheme not only eliminates the input
delay but also self-adjusts its gains in ’¼ünite time to enhance
123

## Page 13

Arabian Journal for Science and Engineering
Fig. 8 Quadrotor control signals
Fig. 9 The MTN parameters for
the position coordinates
123

## Page 14

Arabian Journal for Science and Engineering
Fig. 10 The MTN parameters
for the attitude angles
Fig. 11 Adaptive gains of the
proposed controller for the
position coordinates
tracking accuracy. Another disadvantage of the ADC is its
inability to compensate for the ’¼ültering error compared to the
proposed control scheme. Thus, the proposed control scheme
offers the best tracking accuracy with respect to settling time
and overshoot as shown in Figs. 4 and 5. The tracking errors
for the quadrotor position and attitude under the three strate-
gies are depicted in Figs. 6 and 7, respectively. It can be
observed that the position and attitude tracking errors con-
verge to the vicinity of zero faster under the proposed control
scheme compared to both ADSC and DOB. The control
signals of the quadrotor system that realize the ’¼ünite-time
trajectory tracking with reasonable accuracy are presented in
Fig. 8.
The parameters for adjusting the MTN to approximate
the uncertain nonlinearities of the quadrotor are presented in
Figs. 9 and 10. The estimated gains of the position attitude
subsystems of the quadrotor are presented in Figs. 11 and
12, respectively. It is clear that the gains are self-adjusting
according to the desired trajectories.
To further illustrate the comparisons of the proposed con-
troller, DOB, and ADSC, Tables 2, 3, and 4 are provided.
Table 2 presents the comparison of the settling time of
the three controllers. It can be observed that the proposed
controller has the smallest settling time despite the input
delay. In addition, Table 3 shows that the root-mean-square
of the tracking error is smaller under the proposed con-
troller compared to both DOB and ADSC. Moreover, Table
123

## Page 15

Arabian Journal for Science and Engineering
Fig. 12 Adaptive gains of the
proposed controller for the
attitude angles
4 demonstrates that the maximum overshoot under the pro-
posed controller is the least among the three controllers.
Thus, the proposed controller offers the best performance
in terms of settling time, root-mean-square of the tracking
error, and overshoot for the quadrotor system considered in
this study.
5 Conclusions
This paper studied the ’¼ünite-time adaptive control of a
quadrotor with input delay, parametric variations, and exter-
nal disturbances. The Pade approximation method has been
used to eliminate the input delay. A DSC approach realized
the attitude and position tracking of the quadrotor in ’¼ünite
time. A modi’¼üed ’¼ürst-order ’¼ülter with more terms has been
employed to avoid the ŌĆ£explosion of complexityŌĆØ problem
and compensate for the boundary layer errors in ’¼ünite time.
The gains of the DSC are updated online with the aid of
adaptive laws so they can self-adjust whenever the target tra-
jectories change to improve tracking accuracy. The uncertain
nonlinearities and external disturbances are approximated
via the MTN. A single parameter has been used to update
the MTN to reduce the computational load. The ’¼ünite-time
convergence of the closed-loop system to a compact set has
been proven using the Lyapunov candidate function. The
simulations have shown that the proposed control strategy
displayed the smallest tracking errors, the least overshoots,
and the shortest settling time compared to ADSC and DOB.
The remote control of a quadrotor requires a reliable wire-
less communication. However, this exposes the quadrotor to
potential cyber-attacks from adversaries. In the next research,
we will investigate the potential of fractional-order DSC
and fractional-order observer to mitigate denial-of-service
attacks and ensure the quadrotorŌĆÖs trajectory tracking with
acceptable accuracy.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adap-
tation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indi-
cate if changes were made. The images or other third party material
in this article are included in the articleŌĆÖs Creative Commons licence,
unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material
is not included in the articleŌĆÖs Creative Commons licence and your
intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the
permitteduse,youwillneedtoobtainpermissiondirectlyfromthecopy-
right holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecomm
ons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
1. Li, B.; Liu, H.; Ahn, C.K.; Gong, W.: Optimized intelligent track-
ing control for a quadrotor unmanned aerial vehicle with actuator
failures. Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 144, 108803 (2024)
2. Dong, F.; Yuan, B.; Zhao, X.; Ding, Z.; Chen, S.: Adaptive robust
constraint-following control for morphing quadrotor UAV with
123

## Page 16

Arabian Journal for Science and Engineering
uncertainty: a segmented modeling approach. J. Franklin Inst.
361(5), 106678 (2024)
3. Maaruf, M.; El-Ferik, S.: Learning-based safety-guaranteed sliding
mode af’¼üne formation maneuver control of quadrotors vulnerable
to cyber-attacks. ISA Trans. 159, 66ŌĆō79 (2025)
4. Sahrir, N.H.; Basri, M.A.M.: Pso-pid controller for quadcopter
UAV: index performance comparison. Arab. J. Sci. Eng. 48(11),
15241ŌĆō15255 (2023)
5. Mo’¼üd, O.; Mobayen, S.: Robust fractional-order sliding mode
tracker for quad-rotor UAVs: event-triggered adaptive backstep-
ping approach under disturbance and uncertainty. Aerosp. Sci.
Technol. 146, 108916 (2024)
6. Maaruf, M.; Ahmad, S.S.; Hamanah, W.M.; Baraean, A.M.; Sha’¼üul
Alam, M.; Abido, M.A.; Sha’¼üullah, M.: Advanced optimization
methodsfornonlinearbacksteppingcontrollersforquadrotor-slung
load systems. IEEE Access 13, 66607ŌĆō66621 (2025)
7. Olguin-Roque, J.; Salazar, S.; Gonz├Īlez-Hernandez, I.; Lozano,
R.: A robust ’¼üxed-time sliding mode control for quadrotor UAV.
Algorithms 16(5), 229 (2023)
8. Hassani, H.; Mansouri, A.; Ahaitouf, A.: Robust trajectory tracking
control of an uncertain quadrotor via a novel adaptive nonsingular
sliding mode control. Arab. J. Sci. Eng. 49(5), 6773ŌĆō6797 (2024)
9. Villa, D.K.; Brand├Żo, A.S.; Sarcinelli-Filho, M.: Adaptive sliding
mode control applied to quadrotors-a practical comparative study.
J. Franklin Inst. 360(16), 11578ŌĆō11599 (2023)
10. Noordin, A.; Mohd Basri, M.A.; Mohamed, Z.; Mat Lazim, I.:
Adaptive pid controller using sliding mode control approaches for
quadrotor UAV attitude and position stabilization. Arab. J. Sci. Eng.
46, 963ŌĆō981 (2021)
11. Benghezal, A.; Nemra, A.; Bouaziz, Ne.I.; Tadjine, M.: New robust
backstepping attitude control approach applied to quanser 3 DOF
hover quadrotor in the case of actuators faults. Unmanned Systems
12(01), 3ŌĆō17 (2024)
12. Maaruf, M.; Abubakar, A.N.; Gulzar, M.M.: Adaptive backstep-
ping and sliding mode control of a quadrotor. J. Braz. Soc. Mech.
Sci. Eng. 46(11), 630 (2024)
13. Labbadi, M.; Cherkaoui, M.: Robust adaptive backstepping fast ter-
minalslidingmodecontrollerforuncertainquadrotorUAV.Aerosp.
Sci. Technol. 93, 105306 (2019)
14. Hassani, H.; Mansouri, A.; Ahaitouf, A.: Design and real-time
implementation of a robust backstepping non-singular integral ter-
minal sliding mode attitude control for a quadrotor aircraft. J. Vib.
Control 10775463241240641 (2024)
15. Gao, Q.; Wei, X.-T.; Li, D.-H.; Ji, Y.-H.; Jia, C.: Tracking control
for a quadrotor via dynamic surface control and adaptive dynamic
programming. Int. J. Control Autom. Syst. 20(1), 349ŌĆō363 (2022)
16. Zhu, G.; Lv, L.; Sun, L.; Zhang, X.: Distributed dynamic surface
control for a class of quadrotor UAVs with input saturation and
external disturbance. Drones 8(3), 77 (2024)
17. Ding, F.; Huang, J.; Sun, C.; Ai, Y.; Xu, W.; Yang, C.: Adaptive
dynamic surface control for quadrotor-slung load transportation
system with uncertainties. Sci. China Technol. Sci. 66(10), 2917ŌĆō
2929 (2023)
18. Duan, X.; Yue, C.; Liu, H.; Guo, H.; Zhang, F.: Attitude tracking
control of small-scale unmanned helicopters using quaternion-
based adaptive dynamic surface control. IEEE Access 9, 10153ŌĆō
10165 (2020)
19. Emran, B.J.; Najjaran, H.: Global tracking control of quadrotor
based on adaptive dynamic surface control. Int. J. Dyn. Control
9(1), 240ŌĆō256 (2021)
20. Zhang, X.; Lu, P.; Wang, C.; Zhu, G.; Zhang, X.; Chen, X.; Su,
C.-Y.: Adaptive observer-based implicit inverse control for quadro-
tor unmanned aircraft robots and experimental validation on the
qdrone platform. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cyber-
netics: Systems, 1ŌĆō12 (2024)
21. Wang, X.; Sun, C.; Lin, X.; Yu, Y.: Adaptive neural network con-
trol of a quadrotor with input delay. In: 2018 Chinese Automation
Congress (CAC), pp. 4095ŌĆō4100 (2018)
22. Eraslan, E.; Yildiz, Y.: Flexible quadrotor unmanned aerial vehi-
cles: Spatially distributed modeling and delay-resistant control. J.
Guidance Control Dyn., 1ŌĆō14 (2024)
23. Jang, K.; Bang, H.; Kim, Y.: Mitigating time-delay in nonlinear
dynamics inversion for multirotor unmanned aerial vehicles. J.
Guid. Control. Dyn. 47(3), 573ŌĆō588 (2024)
24. Li, S.; Duan, N.; Min, H.: Trajectory tracking control for quadrotor
unmanned aerial vehicle with input delay and disturbances. Asian
J. Control 26(1), 150ŌĆō161 (2024)
25. Li, S.; Duan, N.; Xu, Z.; Liu, X.: Tracking control of quadrotor
UAV with input delay. In: 2020 39th Chinese Control Conference
(CCC), pp. 646ŌĆō649 (2020)
26. Kartal, M.R.; Ignatyev, D.; Zolotas, A.: Non-linear control of a
quadrotor with actuator delay. In: AIAA SCITECH 2024 Forum,
p. 0569 (2024)
27. Yang, Y.; Zhang, H.H.: Neural network-based adaptive fractional-
order backstepping control of uncertain quadrotors with unknown
input delays. Fract. Fractional 7(3), 232 (2023)
28. Patel, N.; Paul, C.K.; Kar, I.; Mukherjee, S.: Finite time
adaptive backstepping control approach for quadrotors. IFAC-
PapersOnLine 57, 89ŌĆō94 (2024)
29. Jes├║s Rubio, J.; Hernandez, M.A.; Rosas, F.J.; Orozco, E.; Bal-
cazar, R.; Pacheco, J.: Genetic high-gain controller to improve the
position perturbation attenuation and compact high-gain controller
to improve the velocity perturbation attenuation in inverted pendu-
lums. Neural Netw. 170, 32ŌĆō45 (2024)
30. Jes├║sRubio,J.:Differentialevolutionalgorithmforfastgainslearn-
ing in a high-gain controller. IEEE Trans. Neural Netw, Learning
Syst (2025)
31. Xie, X.; Wei, C.; Gu, Z.; Shi, K.: Relaxed resilient fuzzy stabiliza-
tion of discrete-time Takagi-Sugeno systems via a higher order
time-variant balanced matrix method. IEEE Trans. Fuzzy Syst.
30(11), 5044ŌĆō5050 (2022)
32. Jes├║s Rubio, J.; Orozco, E.; Cordova, D.A.; Hernandez, M.A.;
Rosas, F.J.; Pacheco, J.: Observer-based differential evolution con-
strained control for safe reference tracking in robots. Neural Netw.
175, 106273 (2024)
33. Qiu, J.; Wang, T.; Sun, K.; Rudas, I.J.; Gao, H.: Disturbance
observer-based adaptive fuzzy control for strict-feedback nonlin-
ear systems with ’¼ünite-time prescribed performance. IEEE Trans.
Fuzzy Syst. 30(4), 1175ŌĆō1184 (2021)
34. Garc├Ła-Ch├Īvez, R.E.; Silva-Ortigoza, R.; Hern├Īndez-guzm├ĪN,
V.M.; Marciano-Melchor, M.; Orta-Quintana, ├ü.A.; Garc├Ła-
S├Īnchez, J.R.; Taud, H.: A robust sliding mode and pi-based
tracking control for the mimo ŌĆ£dc/dc buck converter-inverter-dc
motorŌĆØ system. IEEE Access 11, 119396ŌĆō119408 (2023)
35. Zhang, X.; Li, H.; Zhu, G.; Zhang, Y.; Wang, C.; Wang, Y.; Su,
C.-Y.: Finite-time adaptive quantized control for quadrotor aerial
vehicle with full states constraints and validation on qdrone exper-
imental platform. Drones 8(6), 264 (2024)
36. Wang, J.; Alattas, K.A.; Bouteraa, Y.; Mo’¼üd, O.; Mobayen, S.:
Adaptive ’¼ünite-time backstepping control tracker for quadrotor
UAV with model uncertainty and external disturbance. Aerosp. Sci.
Technol. 133, 108088 (2023)
37. Shevidi, A.; Hashim, H.A.: Quaternion-based adaptive backstep-
ping fast terminal sliding mode control for quadrotor UAVs with
’¼ünite time convergence. Res. Eng. 23, 102497 (2024)
38. Hu, M.; Ahn, H.; You, K.: Finite-time rapid global sliding-mode
control for quadrotor trajectory tracking. IEEE Access 11, 22364ŌĆō
22375 (2023)
39. Labbadi, M.; Guerra, T.-M.; Djemai, M.: Fractional ’¼ünite-time
control for robust tracking of nonlinear systems subject to h├Člder
123

## Page 17

Arabian Journal for Science and Engineering
disturbances with application to uavs. ISA Trans. 153, 209ŌĆō222
(2024)
40. Sun, Q.; Zhang, Y.; Wu, S.; Zhang, C.; Jiang, X.: Adaptive multi-
dimensionalTaylornetworktrackingcontrolforaclassofnonlinear
strict feedback systems. Appl. Sci. 13(23), 12864 (2023)
41. Bali, A.; Singh, U.P.; Kumar, R.: Multi-dimensional Taylor
network-based fault-tolerant control for nonlinear systems with
unmodeled dynamics and actuator faults. Neural Process. Lett.
55(4), 4047ŌĆō4073 (2023)
42. Li, D.-P.; Liu, Y.-J.; Tong, S.; Chen, C.P.; Li, D.-J.: Neural
networks-based adaptive control for nonlinear state constrained
systems with input delay. IEEE Trans. Cybernet. 49(4), 1249ŌĆō1258
(2018)
43. Wang, J.; Zhang, P.; Wang, Y.; Ji, Z.: Adaptive dynamic
programming-based optimal control for nonlinear state constrained
systems with input delay. Nonlinear Dyn. 111(20), 19133ŌĆō19149
(2023)
44. Zhang, G.; Deng, Y.; Zhang, W.: Robust neural path-following
control for underactuated ships with the DVS obstacles avoidance
guidance. Ocean Eng. 143, 198ŌĆō208 (2017)
45. Peng, H.; Huang, B.; Jin, M.; Zhu, C.; Zhuang, J.: Distributed
’¼ünite-time bearing-based formation control for underactuated sur-
face vessels with levant differentiator. ISA Trans. 147, 239ŌĆō251
(2024)
123
