# s40435-025-01805-4.pdf

## Page 1

International Journal of Dynamics and Control (2025) 13:306
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40435-025-01805-4
Adaptive backstepping trajectory tracking control without velocity
measurements for quadrotor UAVs under multiple unknown
disturbances
Nigar Ahmed1 · Khalil Hajlaoui2 · Maode Ma3
Received: 6 February 2025 / Revised: 13 June 2025 / Accepted: 28 July 2025 / Published online: 27 August 2025
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature 2025
Abstract
An unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) quadrotor, subject to various unknown disturbances, must be capable of performing
both aggressive and non-aggressive maneuvers. Therefore, this paper presents an adaptive backstepping trajectory tracking
control technique without velocity measurements for quadrotor UAVs subject to multiple nonlinear disturbances. Despite
the quadrotor’s underactuated dynamical model, this paper explores a fully actuated controller for trajectory tracking in a
3D plane. Initially, a tracking error is deﬁned, and the dynamic surface method is employed to derive a ﬁlter and auxiliary
controller, addressing the requirement for repeated derivatives of the control input. Subsequently, a Lyapunov candidate
function is introduced to derive adaptive laws for tuning the control parameters of the auxiliary controller and ﬁlter, ensuring
stability of the error dynamics. Additionally, a high-gain observer is designed for state estimation and integrated with the
controller to achieve the control objectives. For disturbance attenuation, a disturbance observer is designed and integrated
into the control scheme for estimation and rejection of von K´arm´an turbulence and noises modeled by Gaussian distribution
and uniformly random distribution. Stability analysis, based on Lyapunov criteria, and simulation study, using the DJI F450
quadrotor, validate the effectiveness and stability of the proposed controller.
Keywords Unmanned aerial vehicle · Robust control · Aggressive maneuvers · Turbulence · Disturbance observer
1 Introduction
Quadrotor control presents a signiﬁcant challenge in the
research community, primarily due to its underactuated,
multi-input, multi-output (MIMO) dynamic system. Achiev-
ing control requires the design of four control inputs to
regulate six outputs, encompassing both rotational and trans-
lational dynamics. The basic mechanical structure of a
quadrotor consists of four rotors, which are mounted at the
ends of the airframe’s arms. These conﬁgurations can be
either ”X” or ”+” shaped, as depicted in Fig. 1 [1]. Each
rotor generates thrust, and by manipulating the thrust levels
of each rotor, a range of ﬂight modes can be attained, includ-
B Nigar Ahmed
nigar.ahmed.pk@gmail.com
1
College of Automation, Nanjing University of Aeronautics
and Astronautics, Nanjing, China
2
Imam Mohammad Ibn Saud Islamic University (IMSIU),
Riyadh, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
3
College of Engineering, Qatar University, Doha, Qatar
ing vertical takeoff and landing (VTOL) as well as trajectory
tracking. The rotor speeds and ON-OFF control topology
required to execute speciﬁc ﬂight missions are summarized
in Table 1. Due to their versatility and high maneuverabil-
ity, quadrotor unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) have found
widespread use across military, commercial, industrial, and
civilian applications. Beginning with basic VTOL control
objectives and extending to aggressive and non-aggressive
maneuvers, researchers have conducted extensive studies to
improve and develop novel control techniques.
Traditional and advanced linear control techniques have
been widely applied to quadrotor control systems to achieve
stabilization, hovering, and trajectory tracking in the Carte-
sian plane [2]. A proportional–integral–derivative (PID)
control strategy has been developed for rotational control,
with the objective of enhancing energy efﬁciency by opti-
mizing the PID gain parameters using a differential evolution
algorithm [3]. To address both trajectory tracking and power
efﬁciency, [4] proposed a PID controller integrated with the
cuckoo search algorithm, which signiﬁcantly improved the
controller’s ability to manage parametric uncertainties. Sim-
123

## Page 2

306
Page 2 of 18
N. Ahmed et al.
Fig. 1 “×” and “+” conﬁguration of quadrotor
Table 1 Rotor Speeds for “×”—Quadrotor Movements
Movement
T1
T2
T3
T4
Vertical Lift (VTOL)
ON
ON
ON
ON
Pitch Forward
OFF
ON
ON
OFF
Pitch Backward
ON
OFF
OFF
ON
Roll Left
OFF
ON
ON
OFF
Roll Right
ON
OFF
OFF
ON
Yaw Clockwise
OFF
ON
OFF
ON
Yaw Counterclockwise
ON
OFF
ON
OFF
ilarly, [5] introduced an implicit PID controller designed to
achieve robust tracking control under the inﬂuence of exter-
nal disturbances, utilizing linear matrix inequalities (LMIs)
to establish system stability and convergence properties.
However, these approaches either focus exclusively on the 3-
degree-of-freedom (DOF) rotational control problem or fail
to account for disturbances during full trajectory tracking.
Moreover, during the modeling process, important factors
such as Coriolis forces, hub moments, and other forces inher-
ent in the Euler–Lagrange formulation are often neglected.
The linear quadratic regulator (LQR) control technique
has been employed to achieve 3-degree-of-freedom (DOF)
control for tracking the Euler angles of quadrotors [6].
This method incorporates integral action within a differ-
ential game framework to eliminate steady-state errors and
enhance control performance. While LQR offers a straight-
forward implementation and robust performance, it presents
challenges in selecting appropriate weighting matrices. To
address this issue, optimization techniques such as genetic
algorithms and differential evolution have been applied to
improve trajectory tracking performance [7]. Furthermore,
the linear quadratic Gaussian (LQG) controller has been pro-
posed to optimize control gains and select the appropriate
weighting matrices, thereby ensuring precise object tracking
and safe landing of quadrotor UAVs [8]. Despite achiev-
ing commendable control performance, these methods are
highly dependent on accurate mathematical models of the
quadrotor system and are sensitive to uncertainties and para-
metric variations [9]. As a result, adaptive control strategies
for quadrotor systems have garnered considerable attention
in recent research.
Adaptive control is an online estimation technique used
to assist in tuning control gains and has been widely applied
in quadrotor UAV control applications. Adaptive criteria
for adjusting the weighting matrices in the LQR approach
have been introduced, resulting in enhanced tracking con-
trol performance while addressing issues related to actuator
effectiveness loss, parametric uncertainties, and internal dis-
turbances [10]. A robust integral of the signum error was
proposed to design an adaptive law using immersion and
invariance, successfully achieving tracking control while
mitigating unwanted uncertainties and disturbances [11].
However, as an online estimation technique, adaptive con-
trol can fail if the quadrotor states are inaccurately measured
[12].
Sliding mode control (SMC) is inherently resistant to a
wide range of disturbances, as well as parametric and mod-
eling uncertainties [13]. A nonlinear sliding manifold based
on tracking error was designed to develop a control law that
ensures the quadrotor UAV follows the desired trajectory
[14]. This technique also utilized adaptive laws for tun-
ing control gains, demonstrating insensitivity to variations
in mechanical conﬁgurations. SMC techniques have been
developed for attitude and trajectory tracking control objec-
tives, following a two-step procedure that involves deﬁning
the manifold and constructing the control law [15–17]. How-
ever, these control techniques achieve asymptotic stability
and are prone to chattering due to the discontinuous switch-
ing function, which can lead to heating issues and damage the
actuators, potentially altering the dynamics of the quadrotor
model. To minimize chattering, high-order SMC techniques
have been proposed, where the discontinuous control inputs
are distributed across higher-order terms derived from the
higher derivatives of the sliding mode manifold [18, 19]. To
achieve ﬁnite-time stability, a non-singular terminating SMC
technique has been presented in [20]. Although ﬁnite-time
stability has been achieved, robustness against uncertainties
and disturbances has been ensured, and chattering minimized
in this research, the issue has not been completely resolved.
The backstepping control (BSC) technique has been
developed for quadrotors to achieve desired control perfor-
mance while minimizing chattering. BSC techniques have
been designed to achieve stabilization and trajectory track-
ing of quadrotor UAVs [21–23]. In these methods, tracking
errors are ﬁrst deﬁned, followed by the indeﬁnite cancelation
of cross-coupling terms using Lyapunov criteria. However,
these approaches rely on accurate modeling of the quadrotor
system. To address unmodeled dynamics, a neural network
was employed alongside the BSC technique to ensure Lya-
punov stability [24]. Furthermore, the BSC method was
modiﬁed to tackle both unmodeled dynamics and parametric
uncertainties [25]. Although these techniques have achieved
remarkable performance in quadrotor control, the cross-
cancelation of indeﬁnite terms has led to increased control
123

## Page 3

Adaptive backstepping trajectory tracking control...
Page 3 of 18
306
activity. Additionally, the control system exhibited a lack of
robustness, necessitating empirical tuning for various scenar-
ios.
Control techniques that combine adaptive laws, slid-
ing mode control (SMC), and backstepping control (BSC)
methods have been presented in the literature. A control
method was proposed in which the switching gain of the
SMC technique is integrated into the backstepping design to
minimize chattering [26]. Following this, the adaptive back-
stepping sliding mode control (BSMC) was developed to
enable quadrotors to track predeﬁned trajectories. A con-
troller for the decoupled rotational and translational systems
was designed, with the BSMC addressing actuator faults in
quadrotors and achieving hovering ﬂight mode [27]. How-
ever, thesecontrol methods typicallyachieveonlyasymptotic
stability. To attain fast convergence and ﬁnite-time stability
of the closed-loop system, a terminating sliding manifold for
the SMC combined with the BSC method was designed [28].
However, for control gain tuning, a predeﬁned characteris-
tic equation was employed, which is inadequate during real
experiments.
In recent trends, model predictive control (MPC) tech-
niques have been extensively applied to quadrotor control
[29, 30]. These MPC methods utilize advanced algorithms to
predict the future rotational and translational state variables
of the quadrotor and optimize the control inputs over a ﬁnite-
timehorizon.Anticipatingfuturestatesandmanagingsystem
constraints are signiﬁcant advantages of these techniques;
however, real-time implementation of MPC is challenging
duetounwantedexternaldisturbanceswithunknownbounds.
Neural network-based techniques have been designed for
approximating the nonlinear dynamics of both rotational and
translational systems, achieving trajectory tracking and dis-
turbance attenuation for disturbances with known bounds
[31–34]. However, extensive training data and computational
power are required for real-time implementation in quadro-
tor UAVs. In addition to these methods, other popular control
approaches for quadrotor control include fuzzy logic control
with rule-based design [35, 36], nonlinear dynamic inversion
for the cancelation of highly coupled nonlinear terms [37],
and geometric control that directly operates on the special
Euclidean group (SE(3)) [38], among others, control tech-
niques in [39] and as summarized in a brief survey in Table
2.
Quadrotor UAVs encounter a range of challenges in con-
trol design due to disturbances, parametric and modeling
uncertainties, actuator faults, and sensor inefﬁciencies. To
address unwanted internal and external disturbances and
achieve control objectives such as hovering and tracking, a
disturbance observer (DO) can be integrated with the con-
troller to design disturbance observer-based control (DOBC)
[40]. A linear dual DO capable of estimating exogenous
disturbances with constant peak-to-peak magnitude and fre-
quency was developed [41]. Additionally, a nonlinear DO for
a small-scale indoor quadrotor was designed, in which distur-
bances and uncertainties were lumped together to establish
a maximum constant bound [42]. However, these techniques
require an accurate model of the quadrotor, and all states and
their rates must be available. In conjunction with controllers
to achieve tracking control, DOBC based on sliding mode
control (SMC) and backstepping control (BSC) techniques
has been designed [15, 43]. However, these methods necessi-
tate not only rotational and translational state measurements
but also the rates of change of the disturbance observer.
To address the issue of accurate state measurements, state
observers serve as a powerful tool for state estimation. In this
approach, the quadrotor’s rotational and translational out-
puts are utilized to estimate all state variables. SMC-based
output-feedback control (OFC) system was designed using
state estimations and disturbance observers (DO) for trajec-
tory tracking in the presence of disturbances, uncertainties,
and input saturations [44]. However, the inevitable chatter-
ing issue remained unresolved, and empirical tuning was still
required for control gains. An adaptive law was designed and
combined with a BSC based OFC technique [45]. Neverthe-
less, BSC requires repeated derivatives of the state variables,
which can lead to an ”explosion of complexity” due to high
control action. Neural networks were employed to approx-
imate partially unknown quadrotor dynamics by combining
both rotational and translational systems, with all control
inputs deﬁned simultaneously [34]. Additionally, an optimal
OFC technique was developed, integrated with a distur-
bance observer, where all state variables and their rates were
replaced with estimated states obtained through a traditional
state observer [46]. However, this method assumed a prede-
ﬁned maximum bound on the disturbance, which increased
the risk of instability when disturbances exceeded that bound.
Based on the preceding literature review and the brief
survey of state estimation methods, a signiﬁcant research
gap exists in addressing the quadrotor control problem.
The uncertain environment, disturbances, modeling, and
parametric uncertainties, along with the underactuated and
strongly coupled nonlinear dynamics of quadrotor UAVs,
render the design of trajectory tracking control algorithms
considerably more challenging. Therefore, this research aims
to provide advancements in addressing these challenges. The
major contributions of this paper are as follows:
1. This paper investigates a novel approach to negate the
assumptions of full state measurements and complete
knowledge of quadrotor dynamics. A state estimation cri-
terion based on the high-gain observer (HGO) is designed
and integrated with disturbance observer-based control
(DOBC) to formulate an algorithm aimed at achieving
nonlinear trajectory tracking objectives.
123

## Page 4

306
Page 4 of 18
N. Ahmed et al.
Table 2 Brief Survey of State Estimation Methods for Quadrotor UAVs
Research
Method
Contributions
Limitations
[18, 47]
Sliding Mode Observer
Robust to disturbances and uncertainties
Chattering issue
[48–50]
Kalman Filters
Stochastic approach; optimal estimation for
linearized quadrotor systems
Assumes noise must be Gaussian; sensitive to
modeling uncertainties
[51, 52]
Unscented Kalman Filter
Does not rely on linearization; improved
performance in estimating nonlinearities
Computational and implementation
complexity
[51, 53, 54]
Extended Kalman Filter
Sensor fusion; effective for nonlinear systems,
fault detection with adaptive threshold
Linearization errors
[55, 56]
High-Gain Observer
Fast convergence
Sensitivity to noise; peaking phenomenon due
to ﬁnite escape time
Fig. 2 Quadrotor movement
2. Dynamic surface control is incorporated within the back-
stepping control (BSC) framework to address the issue of
repeated derivatives in both the controller and the distur-
bance observer.
3. An adaptive ﬁlter is developed based on an auxiliary
adaptive control scheme, enabling the ﬁlter to adjust to
unknown bounded uncertainties and eliminating the need
for manual tuning of control gains.
4. A disturbance observer is designed to attenuate nonlinear
disturbances, speciﬁcally addressing von K´arm´an turbu-
lence and noises modeled by Gaussian distribution and
uniformly random distribution..
The structure of the paper is as follows: Section 2 presents
the mathematical modeling and preliminaries necessary for
the control design. Section 3 outlines the control design and
stability analysis, followed by the control validation and sim-
ulations in Section 4. Finally, the paper concludes in Section
5.
2 Preliminaries
2.1 Problem statement
Fig. 2 illustrates the position and orientation changes of a
quadrotor while performing trajectory tracking along a lin-
ear path. Even for relatively simple ﬂight tasks, the rotors
in the propulsion system must respond rapidly and pre-
cisely to generate the required thrust, enabling the quadrotor
to change direction and maintain stability. A fundamental
aspect of controller design involves minimizing the error
between the actual and desired positions. However, achiev-
ing precise trajectory tracking becomes challenging in the
presence of nonlinear disturbances that affect the quadrotor’s
dynamics. To address this challenge, this research utilizes a
nonlinear error formulation between the desired trajectory
and the quadrotor’s actual position to develop an effective
control strategy. The aim is to achieve trajectory tracking of
highly aggressive and dynamic trajectories, ensuring rapid
response and stability under complex ﬂight conditions.
Building on this premise, this paper proposes an adap-
tive ﬁlter-based dynamic surface control approach to ensure
robust trajectory tracking under multiple nonlinear distur-
bances in the Cartesian plane. The proposed method begins
with the development of an auxiliary control law featuring an
adaptive gain to enhance system adaptability. Subsequently,
an adaptive ﬁltering mechanism is designed to mitigate the
issue of repeated differentiation inherent in the backstepping
control technique. A comprehensive control algorithm is then
formulated to simultaneously achieve trajectory tracking and
disturbance attenuation. To further improve performance, a
nonlinear disturbance observer is integrated to estimate and
reject external disturbances. Additionally, state estimation is
enhanced using a high-gain observer, which is incorporated
into the control scheme to formulate a disturbance observer-
based control framework. The proposed approach aims to
enhance the quadrotor’s stability and precision in trajectory
tracking, even in the presence of complex environmental per-
turbations.
2.2 Mathematical model
The dynamical model of quadrotor is written as follows [1,
57]:
123

## Page 5

Adaptive backstepping trajectory tracking control...
Page 5 of 18
306
¨x = (cos φ sin θ cos ψ + sin φ sin ψ) Up/m
¨y = (cos φ sin θ sin ψ −sin φ cos ψ) Up/m
¨z = (cos φ cos θ) Up/m −g
¨φ = ˙θ ˙ψ

Iy −Iz

/Ix + ˙θr Ir/Ix + l/IxUφ
¨θ = ˙φ ˙ψ (Iz −Ix) /Iy −˙φr Ir/Iy + l/IyUθ
¨ψ = ˙φ ˙θ

Ix −Iy

/Iz + 1/IzUψ
(1)
where m and g denote mass of quadrotor and gravitational
forces, respectively. φ, θ, and ψ denote attitude angles, i.e.,
roll, pitch, and yaw, respectively. Furthermore, l is a length
of rotor from center of gravity, Ix, Iy, and Iz denote inertia
of quadrotor, and Ir denotes inertia of a rotor. In addition,
r = ω1 −ω2 + ω3 −ω4. Next, the control inputs are
written as follows:
Uφ = b

−ω2
2 + ω2
4

;Uθ = b

−ω2
1 + ω2
3

;
Uψ = d

ω2
1 −ω2
2 + ω2
3 −ω2
4

;
Up = b

ω2
1 + ω2
2 + ω2
3 + ω2
4

(2)
where b and d are denoting lift and resistance coefﬁcients,
respectively. Next, assuming φ = x1, ˙φ = x2, θ = x3,
˙θ = x4, ψ = x5, ˙ψ = x6, x = x7, ˙x = x8, y = x9, ˙y = x10,
z = x11, and ˙z = x12. Then, a state-space model can be
derived as follows:
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
˙x1
˙x2
˙x3
˙x4
˙x5
˙x6
˙x7
˙x8
˙x9
˙x10
˙x11
˙x12
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
=
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
x2
x4x6
 Iy−Iz
Ix

+ x4r Ir
Ix + l
Ix Uφ
x4
x2x6

Iz−Ix
Iy

−x2r Ir
Iy + l
Iy Uθ
x6
x2x4
 Ix−Iy
Iz

+ 1
Iz Uψ
x8
Ux
m Up
x10
Uy
m Up
x12
(cos x1 cos x3) Up
m −g
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
(3)
where
Ux = cos φ sin θ cos ψ + sin φ sin ψ
Uy = cos φ sin θ sin ψ −sin φ cos ψ
(4)
2.3 Lemmas and assumptions
Lemma 1 1 [58]: According to the continuous property of
functions, a continuous function w(x) can be bounded by a
maximum value ¯w if the initial conditions of the functions
are in the compact set.
Fig. 3 Block diagram
Assumption 1 [12]: Assuming small angle approximation,
i.e., cos x ≈1 and sin x ≈x, (1) can be decoupled into
position and attitude submodels consisting of [¨x ¨y ¨z]T and
[ ¨φ ¨θ
¨ψ]T , respectively.
Assumption 2 The dynamics of attitude control should be
much faster than position control [41]. Thus, it is assumed
that all the disturbances, faults, modeling, and parametric
uncertainties are lumped together and appear in the attitude
model.
Assumption 3 The reference trajectory is locally differen-
tiable.
3 Control design and stability analysis
From the mathematical model presented in (1), it is evi-
dent that the position dynamics are inﬂuenced by the attitude
dynamics. Consequently, the model must be decoupled into
separate position and attitude components, necessitating the
design of an outer loop and an inner loop control scheme.
Therefore, controllers for each submodel will be developed
in the subsequent sections. As illustrated in Fig. 3, attitude
control constitutes the inner loop; thus, a controller for the
attitude submodel will be designed ﬁrst, followed by the
development of the position control strategy.
3.1 Attitude Control
A dynamical model of a roll submodel subject to unknown
bounded disturbances is written as follows:
¨φ = ˙θ ˙ψ
 Iy −Iz
Ix

+ ˙θr
Ir
Ix
+ l
Ix
Uφ + dφ(t)
(5)
where dφ(t) is a disturbance. Next, a class of state-space
model is given by:
˙x1 = x2
˙x2 = f1(x, t) + b1Uφ + d(t)
(6)
123

## Page 6

306
Page 6 of 18
N. Ahmed et al.
where
f1(x, t) = x4x6
 Iy −Iz
Ix

+ x4r
Ir
Ix
;
b1 = l
Ix
; d(t) = dφ(t)
(7)
Now, the tracking error is deﬁned as follows:
z1 = x1 −xφr
(8)
where xr deﬁned for the time interval [0, ∞) represents the
tracking reference. Taking the derivative yields:
˙z1 = ˙x1 −˙xφr = x2 −˙xφr
(9)
First-order Levant differentiator to obtain ˙xφr is designed as
follows [59]:
˙χc
1 = −κ1|χc
1 −xφr|
1
2 sign

χc
1 −xφr

+ χc
2φ
˙χc
2 = −κ2sign

χc
1 −xφr

;
(10)
where κ1 and κ2 are positive design constants. And xφr ≈χc
1
is the output and χc
2 is its approximated differentiation. Next,
an auxiliary control law is chosen as follows:
μ1 = −p1z1 + χc
2
(11)
where p1 > 0 is a constant. Next, a ﬁlter is then designed as
follows:
τ ˙ξ1(t) + ξ1(t) = μ1; where ξ1(0) = μ1(0)
(12)
where τ is a time constant and ξ1 denotes the ﬁlter. Next, an
error is deﬁned as e = ξ1−μ1. Then, z2 is chosen as follows:
z2 = x2 −ξ1 −χc
2
(13)
Utilizing (13), (9) can be simpliﬁed as follows:
˙z1 = −p1z1 + z2 + e + χc
2
(14)
Derivative of (13) yields
˙z2 = f1(x, t) + b1Uφ + d(t) −˙χc
2 −μ1
τ + ξ1
τ
(15)
A Lyapunov candidate function can be chosen as follows:
VA = 1
2z2
1 + 1
2z2
2 + 1
2e2 + 1
2α φ ˜p2
1 + 1
2
˜d2
φ
(16)
where αφ is an adaptive control gain. Additionally, ˜p1 =
p1 −ˆp1 and ˜dφ = ˆdφ −dφ where ˆp1 is an adaptive gain, and
ˆdφ is the estimation of disturbance obtained according to the
DO proposed by [60], written as follows:
˙γφ = −lφ(x)g2φγφ −lφ(x)

g2φ pφ(x)
+ hφ(x) + g1φUφ

ˆdφ = γφ + pφ(x)
(17)
where p(x) is a nonlinear design function. l(x), hφ(x),
g1φ(x) and g2φ(x) are obtained as follows:
lφ(x) = ∂pφ(x)
∂x
; hφ(x) =

x2 f (x, t)
T ;
g1φ =

0 b1
T ; g2φ =

0 1
T
(18)
Next, taking the derivative of (41) yields
˙VA = z1˙z1 + z2˙z2 + e˙e + 1
α

−˙ˆp1

˜p1 + ˜dφ ˙˜dφ
(19)
where ˙˜dφ = ˙ˆdφ −˙dφ can be obtained as follows:
˙˜dφ = −lφ(x)g2φ ˜dφ = −λφ ˜dφ
(20)
Now, substituting (14), (15), (20) and using e = ξ1 −μ1 into
(19) yields:
˙VA = −p1z2
1 + z1z2 + z1e + z1χc
2 + z2

f1(x)
+ b1Uφ + dφ −˙χc
2 −μ1
τ + ξ1
τ

−e2
τ
−FA(⋆)e −
˙ˆp1
αφ
˜p1 −λφ ˜d2
φ
(21)
where FA(⋆) = FA(x1, x2, z1, z2, e) = ∂μ1
∂x1 ˙x1 + ∂μ1
∂z1 ˙z1 is
a continuous function. Now, according to Lemma 1, by uti-
lizing the continuous property, the function FA(⋆) can be
bounded by a maximum value ¯FA, provided that the initial
conditions are in the compact set [58]. Subsequently, a con-
troller with an adaptive ﬁlter and gain is designed as follows:
Uφ(t) = −1
b1

z1 + f1(x, t) −˙χc
2 −1
τ

ˆμ1 + ξ1

+ k1z2 + ˆdφ(t)

;
ˆμ1(t) = −ˆp1z1 + χc
2;
˙ˆp1(t) = −αφ
τ z1z2;
˙ξ1(t) = 1
τ

ˆμ1(t) −ξ1(t)

(22)
123

## Page 7

Adaptive backstepping trajectory tracking control...
Page 7 of 18
306
Substituting (22) into (21) and using Young’s inequality
yields:
˙VA ≤−p1z2
1 −k1z2
2 −

λφ −1
2

˜d2
φ
+ 1
2

z2
1 + z2
2

+ 1
2 B1
(23)
where B1 ≥max{

e + ˙xφr
2 −
 2
τ + 1

e2 + ¯F2
A}. Since,
p1 > 0 is an unknown positive constant, by choosing
k1 > 0 sufﬁciently large and designing lφ(x) such that
lφ(x)g2φ(x) > 1
2, it can be ensured that ˙VA < 0, resulting in
an asymptotic stable closed-loop system.
Next, for the design of the OFC algorithm, it is assumed
that dφ(t) = 0 is assumed. Consequently, a high-gain
observer (HGO) for state estimation can be designed as fol-
lows [61]:
˙ˆx1 = ˆx2 + βφ1
ε

yφ −ˆx1

˙ˆx2 = ˆf1(ˆx, t) + b1Uφ + βφ2
ε

yφ −ˆx1

(24)
where yφ = x1 is the measurable output angle, ˆf1(ˆx, u) is
the nominal model of f1(x, t), and ε > 0 is a constant. Fur-
thermore, βφ1 and βφ2 are constants such that the polynomial
w2+βφ1w+βφ2 is Hurwitz. To perform the stability analysis,
the state estimation errors are deﬁned as follows:
e1 = 1
ε ˜x1; e2 = ˜x2
(25)
Let e = [e1, e2]T . Taking derivative and simplifying yields
ε˙e = Ae+εδ, where matrices δ and A are written as follows:
A =
−βφ1 1
−βφ2 0

; δ =
0
˜f

(26)
where ˜f = f1(x, t) −ˆf1(ˆx, t) and A is Hurwitz due to the
characteristic polynomial deﬁned by βφ1 and βφ2. Now, a
Lyapunov candidate function is chosen as follows:
VH = eT Pe
(27)
where P = [p11, p12; p21, p22] with positive constants such
that P = PT > 0 and p12 = p21. In addition P is obtained
by solving P A + AT P = −I. Next, taking the derivative
of VH and simplifying, along with using Young’s inequality
yields:
˙VH = −eT e + 2εeT Pδ
≤−

1 −ε2
2

e2
1 −

1 −
ε2
2β2
φ2
 1
βφ1
×

1 + βφ2

+ βφ1

e2
2 + ˜f 2
(28)
Hence, asymptotic stability can be achieved by appropriately
choosing βφ1 > 0, βφ2 > 0 and designing ε ∈(0, 1] to be
sufﬁciently small. The asymptotic stability is also investi-
gated and validated in following corollary.
Corollary 1 [61]: Assuming that ˆf1(ˆx, t) is locally Lipschitz
in its arguments then there exists ε∗∈(0, 1] such that for
0 < ε < ε∗the estimation errors ˜x1 = x1 −ˆx1 and ˜x2 =
x2 −ˆx2 of HGO are bounded as follows:
|˜xi| ≤max
 b
εi−1 ||˜x(0)||e
−at
ε , ερ+1−ick

(29)
where a, b, c and k are positive constants. i ∈[1, 2] and
ρ = 2 is the order of the system.
In order to summarize the control developed for achieving
the desired tracking objectives, following theorem is pro-
posed.
Theorem For a class of nonlinear systems with nonlin-
ear unknown bounded disturbances described by (6), an
output-feedback trajectory tracking control strategy based
on dynamic surface control, combined with an adaptive ﬁl-
ter and DO, can be designed as follows:
⎧
⎪⎨
⎪⎩
Uφ = −1
b1

z1 + f (ˆx) −1
τ (μ1 −ξ1)
+p2z2 + ˆdφ(t)

μ1 = −ˆp1z1 + χc
2
⎧
⎪⎨
⎪⎩
˙γφ = −lφ(ˆx)g2φγφ −lφ(ˆx)

g2φ pφ(ˆx)
+hφ(ˆx) + g1φUφ

ˆdφ = γφ + pφ(ˆx)

˙ξ1 = 1
τ (μ1(t) −ξ1(t)); ˙ˆp1 =−1
τ αz1z2
˙ˆx1 = ˆx2 +
βφ1
ε (yφ −ˆx1)
˙ˆx2 = ˆf1(ˆx, t) + b1Uφ +
βφ2
ε (yφ −ˆx1)
(30)
Proof ALyapunovcandidatefunctioncanbechosenbycom-
bining (16) and (27), written as follows:
V = VA + VH
(31)
123

## Page 8

306
Page 8 of 18
N. Ahmed et al.
Taking the derivative and substituting (23) and (28) yields
˙V ≤−p1z2
1 −k1z2
2 −

1 −ε2
2

e2
1
−

1 −
ε2
2β2
φ2
 1
βφ1

1 + βφ2

+ βφ1

e2
2
−

λφ −1
2

˜d2
φ + 1
2

z2
1 + z2
2

+ 1
2 B1 + ˜f 2
(32)
Hence, by designing appropriate positive gains for control,
DO and HGO, along with sufﬁciently small time constant
τ and ε, asymptotic closed-loop stability are achieved. This
concludes the proof.
Corollary 2 [62]: According to the separation principle, for
state estimation, if the HGO gains are designed to be suf-
ﬁciently large, i.e., if ε is sufﬁciently small, then the OFC
technique recovers the trajectories of the SFC technique.
Hence, the designed controller can be ﬁnalized by replac-
ing state variables with estimated state variables obtained
using state estimation criteria.
For pitch and yaw, similar control development approach
can be followed.
3.2 Position control
The position state-space model represents an underactuated
system characterized by a single control input, Up, and three
outputs, x, y, and z, as illustrated in equation (3). In order
to develop a position controller, an auxiliary control can be
design such that U = [Ux,Uy,Uz]T = −gz + T
m Rz [1].
Therefore, the position model along x-axis is derived as ˙x7 =
x8 and ˙x8 = Ux + dx(t) where dx(t) is a disturbances. Next,
a tracking error is deﬁned as follows:
z7 = x7 −rx
(33)
where rx represents the desired position along the x-axis.
Now, taking the derivative yields:
˙z7 = ˙x7 −˙rx = x8 −˙rx
(34)
First-order Levant differentiator to obtain ˙xφr is designed as
follows [59]:
˙χc
7 = −κ7|χc
7 −rx|
1
2 sign

χc
7 −rx

+ χc
8
˙χc
8 = −κ8sign

χc
7 −rx

;
(35)
where κ7 and κ8 are positive design constants. And rx ≈χc
7
is the output and χc
8 is its approximated differentiation. Next,
an auxiliary control law is constructed as follows:
μ4 = −p4z7 + χc
8
(36)
where p4 > 0 is a constant. The criteria for the ﬁlter are
introduced as follows:
τ ˙ξ4(t) + ξ4(t) = μ4; where ξ4(0) = μ4(0)
(37)
where τ is a time constant and ξ4(t) denotes the ﬁlter. Addi-
tionally, the error is deﬁned as e4 = ξ4 −μ4. Now, z8 is
chosen as follows:
z8 = x8 −ξ4 −χc
8
(38)
By using (38), (34) can be simpliﬁed as follows:
˙z7 = −p4z7 + z8 + e4 + χc
8
(39)
Derivative of (38) yields
˙z8 = Ux + dx(t) −˙χc
8 −μ4
τ + ξ4
τ
(40)
For the design of the standard BSC technique, a Lyapunov
candidate function can be chosen as follows:
VP = 1
2z2
7 + 1
2z2
8 + 1
2e2
4 +
1
2αx
˜p2
4 + 1
2
˜d2
x
(41)
whereαx isaconstant, ˜p4 = p4−ˆp4,and ˆp4 denotesadaptive
gain. Additionally, ˜dx = ˆdx −dx where ˆdx is the estimation
obtained using the DO designed as follows:
˙γx = −lx(x)g2x(x)γx −lx(x)

g2x(x)px(x)
+ hx(x) + g1x(x)Ux

ˆdx = γx + px(x)
(42)
where px(x) is a nonlinear design function. lx(x), hx(x),
g1x(x), and g2x(x) are obtained as follows:
lx(x) = ∂px(x)
∂x
; hx(x) =

x8 0
T ;
g1x =

0 1
T ; g2x =

0 1
T
(43)
Next, the error dynamics of DO are obtained as ˙˜dx = ˙ˆdx −˙dx,
simpliﬁed as follows:
˙˜dx = −lx(x)g2x ˜dx = −λx ˜dx
(44)
where λx is DO control gain.
By invoking the adaptive gain in the auxiliary controller,
it can be expressed as ˆμ4 = −ˆp4z7 + ˙rx. Next, taking the
derivative of (41) yields
˙V (t) = z7˙z7 + z8˙z+e4 ˙e4 −1
αx
˙ˆp4 ˜p4
−lx(x)g2x ˜dx
(45)
123

## Page 9

Adaptive backstepping trajectory tracking control...
Page 9 of 18
306
Now, substituting (39), (40) and using e = ξ −μ1 yields
˙VP = −p4z2
7 + z7z8 + z7e4 + z7χc
8 + z8

Ux
+ dx(t) −˙χc
8 −1
τ (μ4 + ξ4) −ˆdφ + dφ

−e2
4
τ −FP(⋆)e4 −1
αx
˙ˆp4 ˜p4 −λx ˜dx
(46)
where FP(⋆) = FP(x7, x8, z7, z8, e4) = ∂μ4
∂x7 ˙x7 + ∂μ4
∂z7 ˙z7 is
a continuous function. Now, introducing to Lemma 1, the
function FP(⋆) can be bounded by a maximum value ¯FP pro-
vided that the initial conditions are in the compact set. Next,
a control scheme can be formulated as follows:
Ux = −z7 + ˙χc
8 + 1
τ

ˆμ4 −ξ4

−k4z8 + ˆdx(t)
(47)
where ˆdx(t) is the estimated disturbance.
Substituting (47) into (46) and using Young’s inequality
yields
˙VP = −p4z2
7 −k4z2
8 −
1
τ z7z8 + 1
αx
˙ˆp7

˜p4
+ z7

e4 + χc
8

−e2
4
τ + z8 ˜dx −FP(⋆)e4
−λx ˜dx
(48)
Designing adaptive law as follows:
˙ˆp4 = −1
τ αxz7z8
(49)
Using Young’s inequality and substituting (49) into (48)
yields:
˙VP ≤−p4z2
7 −k4z2
8 −
1
τ z7z8 + 1
αx
˙ˆp4

˜p4
+ 1
2z2
7 + 1
2

e4 + χc
8
2 −e2
4
τ + z8 ˜dx
+ 1
2
¯F2
P + 1
2e2
4
≤−p4z2
7 −k4z2
8 −

λφ −1
2

˜d2
φ
−
2
τ −1

e2 + 1
2z2
7 + 1
2 Bx
(50)
where Bx ≥max{(e + ˙rx)2 + ¯F2
P }. Hence, by choosing
p4 > 0, k4 > 0, and designing τ such that τ < 2, it can
be ensured that ˙VP < 0, resulting in the stable closed-loop
system. Next, to achieve the state estimation criteria, a HGO
can be designed as follows [61]:
˙ˆx7 = ˆx8 + β7
ε

yx −ˆx7

˙ˆx8 = ˆf4(ˆx,Ux, t) + β8
ε2

yx −ˆx7

(51)
where yx = x7 is output along the x-axis. In addition, β7 > 0
and β8 > 0 are HGO gains. Furthermore, ˆf4(ˆx,Ux, t) =
cos ˆx1 sin ˆx3 cos ˆx5 + sin ˆx1 sin ˆx3. Using a similar approach
yields auxiliary controllers Uy and Uz for y-axis and z-axis,
respectively.
Remark 1 Sincepositioncontrolrequiresinformationofesti-
mated attitude angles. Hence, it should be recalled that the
inner loop control dynamics, i.e., attitude control, should
be much faster than the outer loop, i.e., position control,
to achieve the desired stability and trajectory tracking of
quadrotor UAV.
Once the auxiliary controllers are obtained then the position
control, Up can be formulated as follows:
Up =
m (Uz + g)
cos φdes cos θdes
(52)
where the desired attitude angles can be obtained by using
(4) with ψdes as a desired known constant yaw angle. Simpli-
fying yields θdes = θdes = tan−1 Ux cos ψdes+Uy sin ψdes
Uz+g

and
φdes = tan−1 (Ux sin ψdes−Uy cos ψdes) cos θdes
Uz+g

.
The complete control ﬂow and algorithm designed in this
research paper are summarized in Fig. 4 and algorithm 1,
respectively.
4 Simulations
To demonstrate and validate the effectiveness of the pro-
posed control approach, simulations were conducted for
trajectory tracking along a nonlinear path in the presence
of unknown bounded disturbances. The simulations were
performed on a real DJI F450 quadrotor model within the
MATLAB/Simulink environment. The physical parameters
of the quadrotor UAV are listed in Table 3. Additionally, to
further illustrate the controller’s effectiveness and superior-
ity, a comparison is made with the control method presented
in [40].
4.1 Simulation setup and environment
configuration
4.1.1 Desired trajectories design
Simulations were conducted for three distinct trajectories:
a highly aggressive and dynamic trajectory, a helical tra-
123

## Page 10

306
Page 10 of 18
N. Ahmed et al.
Fig. 4 Control ﬂow
Table 3 DJI F450 quadrotor parameters [1, 57]
Parameter
Symbol
Value
Unit
Gravity
g
9.81
m/s2
Mass
m
2
kg
Length
l
0.225
m
Thrust coefﬁcient
b
9.86 × 10−6
Ns2
Drag coefﬁcient
d
1.6 × 10−7
Nms2
Rotor inertia
Jr
2.8 × 10−6
kgm2
Airframe inertia of roll
Ix
0.0035
kgm2
Airframe inertia of pitch
Iy
0.0035
kgm2
Airframe inertia of yaw
Iz
0.0050
kgm2
jectory, and a square trajectory within the Cartesian plane.
The helical and square trajectories exhibit uniform behavior
along the XYZ axes, whereas the highly aggressive trajectory
incorporates aggressive maneuvers. The desired reference
trajectory is represented by r(t) = [xdes, ydes, zdes]T . The
highly aggressive and dynamic trajectory is divided into two
phases, i.e., takeoff-aggressive maneuver phase and landing
phase.
Theﬁrstphaseisdeﬁnedfor0 ≤t < t f writtenasfollows:
xdes(t) = 5
Ts
t −1.5 sin
5πt
Ts

+ cos
10πt
Ts

ydes(t) = 5
Ts
t −1.5 cos
5πt
Ts

+ sin
10πt
Ts

zdes(t) =5 sin2
πt
Ts

+ sin
10πt
Ts

(53)
The landing phase is deﬁned for t f ≤t ≤Ts written as
follows:
xLanding(t) =ς(k)xdes(t)
yLanding(t) =ς(k)ydes(t)
zLanding(t) =ς(k)zdes(t)
(54)
where Ts and Tl denote total ﬂight time and landing phase
time, respectively. t f = Ts −Tl, ς(k) = 6(1 −k)5 −15(1 −
k)4 + 10(1 −k)3 and k =
t−t f
Ts−t f . The remaining two trajec-
tories are given in appendix I.
4.1.2 Disturbances
The quadrotor model is subjected to bounded, unknown dis-
turbances and measurement noise. In this study, external
aerodynamic disturbances opposing the ﬂight dynamics are
modeled using the Von Kármán turbulence model, as detailed
inAlgorithm2.Thisturbulencemodelprovidesamorerealis-
tic representation of atmospheric disturbances, as it explicitly
depends on the quadrotor’s altitude and airspeed, both of
which inﬂuence the intensity and scale of turbulent ﬂuctu-
ations. Furthermore, the model accounts for disturbances
along all three translational axes, thereby enhancing the
ﬁdelity of numerical simulations by replicating real-world
ﬂight conditions more accurately.
Additionally, the noises appearing in the internal atti-
tude dynamics are assumed as uniformly distributed random
noise, Gaussian-distributed random noise characterized by a
peak-to-peak magnitude range of [−1, 1], a seed of 0, and
a sample time of 1 second. Furthermore, band-limited white
noise is introduced with a sample time of 0.5 seconds, a seed
of [23341], and noise power set to 0.1. These disturbances
are generated using Simulink built-in blocks.
4.2 Results
4.2.1 Trajectory tracking
After conducting simulations for the DJI F450 quadrotor
UAV, remarkable trajectory tracking control performance has
been achieved for all of the four trajectories. The control
parameters required to achieve the desired control perfor-
mance are presented in Table 4, where i ∈(φ, θ, ψ, x, y, z)
and j ∈(1, 3, 5, . . . , 11). In all cases, the quadrotor is ini-
123

## Page 11

Adaptive backstepping trajectory tracking control...
Page 11 of 18
306
Algorithm 1 Control algorithm
Require: Quadrotor dynamics, parameters, and reference trajectory:
r(t)
Ensure: Error →0 : xdes ←x(t), ydes(t) ←y(t), zdes(t) ←z(t) ▷
Tracking
0 < ε < 1, 0 < τ < 2, u(t) = 0, ˆd(t) = 0, ψdes, φ(0), θ(0), ψ(0),
x(0), y(0), z(0)
▷
while Tracking error ̸= 0 do
for i ∈(1, 3, 5, . . . , 11) do
˙ˆxi = ˆxi+1 + βi
ε

xi −ˆxi

;
˙ˆxi+1 = ˆf 1
2 (i−1)+1 + βi+1
ε2

xi −ˆxi

˙χc
i = −κi|χc
i −r(t)|
1
2 sign

χc
i −r(t)

+χc
i+1
˙χc
i+1 = −κi+1sign

χc
i −r(t)

;
i = i + 2
end for
if ˜φ(t) ̸= 0, ˜θ(t) ̸= 0 and ˜ψ(t) ̸= 0 then
for i ∈(1, 2, 3) and j ∈(φ, θ, ψ) do
ˆμi = −ˆpi z2i−1 + ˙x jr;
˙ξi(t) = 1
τ

ˆμi −ξi

,
˙ˆpi = −1
τ α j z2i−1z2i
while ˜d(t) ̸= 0 do
˙γ j = −l j g(2i) jγ j −l j(g(2i) j p j + h j
+gi jU j); ˆd j(t) = γ j + pi(x)
end while
U j = −1
bi

z2i−1 + fi(ˆxi) −( ˆμi −ξi)
τ
+ki zi+1 + ˆd j

;
i = i + 1
end for
end if
if ˜x(t) ̸= 0, ˜y(t) ̸= 0 and ˜z(t) ̸= 0 then
for i ∈(4, 5, 6) and j ∈(x, y, z) do
ˆμi = −ˆpi z2i−1 + ˙r j;
˙ξi(t) = 1
τ

ˆμi −ξi

;
˙ˆpi = −1
τ α j z2i−1z2i
while ˜d(t) ̸= 0 do
˙γ j = −l j g(2i) jγ j −l j(g(2i) j p j + h j
+gi jU j); ˆd j(t) = γ j + pi(x)
end while
U j = −z2i−1 + ¨r j + 1
τ

ˆμi −ξi −ki z2i

i = i + 1
end for
θdes; φdes; Up =
m(Uz+g)
cos φdes cos θdes
end if
Uφ, Uθ, Uψ, Up →Control allocation
end while
tially positioned at the origin, with attitude angles set to zero,
speciﬁcally φ(0) = 0, θ(0) = 0, and ψ(0) = 0.
The performance of the quadrotor during the trajectory
tracking in the Cartesian plane is illustrated in Figs. 5, 6,
and 7. It has been observed that the controller developed in
this research work and the comparative controller designed
in [40] exhibit similar control performance for smooth,
consistent, and non-aggressive trajectories. However, when
exposed to the highly aggressive and dynamic trajectory, and
Lissajous trajectory, the comparative controller struggles and
yields signiﬁcant tracking error. In contrast, the controller
Algorithm 2 Von KÃ¡rmÃ¡n Turbulence
1: Given: h, V , t, Tsim
2: Output: Winertial = [Wx, Wy, Wz]T
3: Initialize: t = 0.01, tvec = {0, t, 2t, . . . , Tsim}, N = |tvec|
4: Lx = L y = Lz = 0.177h4/3
5: σw = 0.1V
6: ξx, ξy, ξz ∼N(0, 1),
ξ ∈R3×N
7: Wx(1) = 0,
Wy(1) = 0,
Wz(1) = 0
8: for i = 2 to N do
9:
Wx(i) = Wx(i −1) −Wx(i−1)t
Lx
+
10:
σw

2t
Lx (1 + 0.2Wx(i −1))ξx(i)
11:
Wy(i) = Wy(i −1) −Wy(i−1)t
L y
+
12:
σw

2t
L y (1 + 0.2Wy(i −1))ξy(i)
13:
Wz(i) = Wz(i −1) −Wz(i−1)t
Lz
+
14:
σw

2t
Lz (1 + 0.2Wz(i −1))ξz(i)
15: end for
16: Find Nearest Index: k = arg mini |tvec(i) −t|
17: Output: Winertial =
Wx(k) Wy(k) Wz(k)T
Table 4 Control parameters
Highly aggressive trajectory
Gain
φ(t)
θ(t)
ψ(t)
x(t)
y(t)
z(t)
p j
40
15
10
1
1
1
k j
15
15
10
2
2
2
βi1
1
1
1
1
1
1
βi2
2
2
2
2
2
2
Helical trajectory
p j
40
15
10
50
10
35
k j
15
15
10
2
2
2
βi1
1
1
1
1
1
1
βi2
2
2
2
2
2
2
Square trajectory
p j
40
15
10
15
15
35
k j
15
15
10
2
2
2
βi1
1
1
1
1
1
1
βi2
2
2
2
2
2
2
designed in this research work achieves tracking of aggres-
sive maneuvers effectively, and hence reducing the root mean
square errors (RMSE) signiﬁcantly as compared to the con-
troller in [40], as shown in the RMSE barchart illustrated in
Fig. 8.
Figure 9 presents the simulation results for the posi-
tion, velocity, acceleration, and jerk of the quadrotor during
a highly aggressive and dynamic trajectory tracking ﬂight
mode. The position plot highlights three distinct phases:
takeoff, aggressive maneuvers, and landing. During the take-
off phase, the quadrotor ascends smoothly, demonstrating
gradual and controlled motion that ensures stability and min-
imizes the application of abrupt forces in the early stages
123

## Page 12

306
Page 12 of 18
N. Ahmed et al.
Fig. 5 Trajectory tracking—Highly aggressive and dynamic trajectory
Fig. 6 Trajectory tracking—Helical trajectory
Fig. 7 Trajectory tracking—Square trajectory
of ﬂight. In the aggressive maneuvering phase, the quadro-
tor exhibits dynamic motion along the X, Y, and Z axes,
reﬂecting precise control and high responsiveness. During
the landing phase, the quadrotor transitions smoothly into a
stabledescent,underscoringtherobustnessofthecontrolsys-
tem in managing complex ﬂight dynamics and disturbances.
Additionally, the velocity, acceleration, and jerk plots pro-
vide further insight into the quadrotor’s performance. To
Fig. 8 RMSE barcharts of trajectory tracking
Fig. 9 Position, velocity, acceleration, and jerk while highly aggressive
and dynamic trajectory
execute aggressive maneuvers, the velocity and accelera-
tion adapt dynamically to the trajectory demands. While
some chatter is observed in the jerk proﬁle due to external
disturbances and noise, it remains within acceptable limits,
ensuring the stability of the quadrotor’s dynamics through-
out the mission. This analysis emphasizes the effectiveness
of the control system in maintaining stable and reliable per-
formance under disturbances and noises conditions.
Figure 10 shows the quadrotor’s position and attitude
tracking with respect to time for highly aggressive trajec-
tory. It is evident that the controller achieves desired tracking
control effectively. It is important to highlight that the yaw
angle serves as a known reference input provided to the con-
troller, together with the intended trajectory. Hence, the plot
of yaw angle is constant unlike other quadrotor attitude and
position state variables. Similar tracking performance with
respect to time is achieved for other trajectories. Thus, it is
omitted here.
During the simulations, it was observed that the controller
usedforcomparisonrequiredanempiricalmethodforcontrol
gain design, which posed signiﬁcant challenges in achieving
effective tracking of the highly aggressive and Lissajous tra-
jectories due to its inherent sharp maneuvers. In contrast,
the proposed controller’s reliance on adaptive control laws
facilitated a more straightforward design of the control gains.
Consequently, the controller presented in this paper is easier
to implement and demonstrates superior performance com-
pared to the controller used for comparison.
123

## Page 13

Adaptive backstepping trajectory tracking control...
Page 13 of 18
306
Fig. 10 Quadrotor outputs during highly aggressive and dynamic tra-
jectory tracking: [x, y, z, φ, θ, ψ]T
Remark 2 Desired roll and pitch angles are generated by
using position control whereas yaw angle is initiated as
ψdes = 300 = π/6 radians.
4.2.2 Disturbance attenuation
In DOBC algorithms, it is essential for the DO to exhibit
faster convergence than the controller itself. This principle
is implemented in the current study. To ensure that the DO
converges more rapidly than the controller, the following
nonlinear disturbance observer function is designed:
⎡
⎣
pφ(t)
pθ(t)
pψ(t)
⎤
⎦=
⎡
⎣
λφ 0
0 λθ 0
0
0 λψ
⎤
⎦
⎡
⎣
x2
x4
x6
⎤
⎦;
⎡
⎣
px(t)
py(t)
pz(t)
⎤
⎦=
⎡
⎣
λx 0
0 λy 0
0
0 λz
⎤
⎦
⎡
⎣
x8
x10
x12
⎤
⎦
(55)
where λφ = λθ = λψ = 200 and λx = λy = λz = 5 are
design gain of DOs.
The results of disturbance attenuation and estimation
errors for both the attitude and position submodels are pre-
sented in Figs. 11 and 12, respectively. Gaussian-distributed
disturbances, uniformly distributed disturbances, and band-
limited white noise, which manifest as internal disturbances
within the quadrotor’s attitude model, are effectively esti-
mated using the roll, pitch, and yaw DOs. Similarly, the
quadrotor is subjected to von K´arm´an turbulence to emu-
late realistic position disturbances. The simulation results
demonstrate that the proposed disturbance observer effec-
tively estimates external perturbations. Although a pro-
Fig. 11 Attitude disturbance attenuation and estimation error
Fig. 12 Position disturbance attenuation and estimation error
nounced peak is observed during the transition from aggres-
sive maneuvers to landing, the observer consistently exhibits
robust performance, ensuring accurate disturbance estima-
tion and effective rejection throughout the operational enve-
lope.
Remark 3 The proposed controller in this study is based
on state estimation; thus, all state variables in the distur-
banceobserversarederivedfromtheestimatedstatevariables
obtained using the HGO.
4.2.3 State estimation
Figure13illustratestheestimatedpositionandattitudeangles
during the aggressive maneuvers trajectory tracking control.
123

## Page 14

306
Page 14 of 18
N. Ahmed et al.
Fig. 13 Estimated position and attitude in aggressive maneuvers tra-
jectory tracking: [ˆx, ˆy, ˆz, ˆφ, ˆθ, ˆψ]T
For state estimation, the HGO technique has been integrated
into the controller, utilizing the measurable quadrotor atti-
tude and position outputs to derive the estimates. Once the
estimates of the position and attitude angles are obtained,
these estimated state variables and its rates are employed
within the controller. Consequently, the implementation of
the controller proposed in this paper requires only the desired
trajectory, desired yaw angles, and measurable quadrotor
position and attitude, thereby eliminating the necessity for
measuring velocities using onboard sensors. It is important
to note that the convergence of state estimation is inﬂuenced
by the parameter ε. A smaller value for this parameter facil-
itates quicker convergence; in the presented simulations, it
has been set to ε = 10−5.
4.2.4 Control inputs and ﬁlters
Figure 14 illustrates the position and attitude control inputs
required to achieve the desired trajectory tracking for the
quadrotor UAV. Additionally, the torques and forces exerted
by each rotor are presented in Fig. 15. This ﬁgure also dis-
plays the ﬁlters applied to the position and attitude control
inputs, addressing the inherent problem of backstepping con-
trol, i.e., “explosion of complexity,” due to high control
inputs.
The variable position control input ensures continuous
attenuationofdisturbancesencounteredbythequadrotordur-
ing ﬂight missions. When the landing phase begins, a sharp
peakoccurs duetotheabrupt changeintrajectory, after which
the position control operates smoothly to ensure a precise
and seamless landing. Similarly, disturbance compensation
is evident in the roll, pitch, and yaw control inputs, illus-
trating how the thrust and torque are effectively adapted to
Fig. 14 Position and attitude control inputs [Up, Ux, Uy, Uz]T
Fig. 15 Force and torque of each rotor
counteract external disturbances and maintain robust trajec-
tory tracking performance.
4.2.5 Thrust-to-weight ratio, motor dynamics, energy, and
power consumption
The maximum forces and torques for each rotor are given by
[ f1, f2, f3, f4] = [19.0982, 28.5504, 19.1322, 29.1366] N.
Therefore using 1N ≈101.9716g, the rotor thrusts can
be approximated as [T1, T2, T3, T4] ≈[1947.3, 2910.2,
1950.1, 2970.3] g. Next, the total thrust is obtained as
102.9174N. Therefore, the thrust-to-weight ratio is obtained
as T /W ≈4.2. Hence, it indicates that due to excessive
thrust, the quadrotor is performing high-performance aggres-
sive maneuvers in the presence of disturbances.
Next, aiming at handling approximately 103N thrust,
a motor capable of handling at least 26 N of thrust is
required. In this study, the DJI F450 quadrotor is simulated,
which is equipped with DJI 2212/920KV motors. However,
alternative motor options include EMAX MT2213 935KV
Brushless Motor, T-Motor Air 2216 880KV, and SunnySky
X2212-980KV II Brushless Motor, with maximum thrust
capacities of 1200 g, 1400 g, and 1200 g, respectively. Thus,
the thrust values obtained using the controller developed in
this paper validate the motor dynamics.
Remark 4 The position and attitude control inputs increase
with a decrease in ε, consequently leading to an increase in
the force, torque, and thrust of each rotor. Thus, different
123

## Page 15

Adaptive backstepping trajectory tracking control...
Page 15 of 18
306
Fig. 16 Power and energy consumption
motor options may be required depending on the required
thrust.
Figure 16 presents the simulation results for the energy
and power consumption of each rotor, along with the total
energy and power of the quadrotor, during highly aggressive
trajectory tracking and maneuvers. The results indicate that
all rotors operate with consistent performance, delivering the
necessary power to accomplish the ﬂight mission effectively.
It is noteworthy that the total power demand at the onset of
the simulation is signiﬁcantly elevated. This is attributed to
the initial conditions, where the quadrotor starts from rest
at the origin and must rapidly ascend to initiate trajectory
tracking.
The total power and energy consumption of the quadrotor
throughout the maneuver were observed to be 0.31 kW =
310 W and 19.36 kJ = 19360 J, respectively. Consider-
ing a 3 S LiPo battery with speciﬁcations of 11.1 V and
2200 mAh, the total available energy is calculated as 87120 J.
Consequently, the total energy consumption reported in the
simulation for a one-minute ﬂight mission remains well
within the capacity of the speciﬁed battery, thereby afﬁrming
the feasibility of the proposed controller.
4.3 Discussion on comparison, real experiments,
and limitations
In this paper, we present a controller designed to address
signiﬁcant real-time practical challenges associated with
unknown disturbances, the reliance on onboard sensors for
accurate measurements of quadrotor position and attitude,
rotational and translational velocities, and the inherent prob-
lem of “explosion of complexity” in backstepping control
design. Additionally, adaptive laws are developed to elim-
inate the need for empirical tuning of control gains. The
proposed controller is compared with the one presented by
[40], and simulations are conducted on a real DJI F450
quadrotor for three distinct trajectories: the highly aggressive
trajectory, the helical trajectory, and the square trajectory.
Both controllers demonstrate impressive performance in
tracking the smooth and non-aggressive trajectories. How-
ever, the comparative controller exhibits a steady-state error
when attempting to track the highly aggressive trajectory.
The lack of adaptive laws in the comparative controller com-
plicates the tuning of control gain parameters, whereas the
controller proposed in this study achieves precise tracking
of the highly aggressive trajectory. The incorporation of
adaptive laws simpliﬁes the tuning of control parameters
signiﬁcantly. Furthermore, the nonlinear DO introduced in
this research effectively attenuates disturbances with variable
frequency and magnitude, as well as uniformly distributed
random disturbances and band-limited white noise. In con-
trast, the comparative controller is limited to attenuating
exogenous disturbances with constant frequency and mag-
nitude.
The implementation of the controller developed in this
paper necessitates only the desired trajectory and measur-
able outputs; onboard sensors are solely utilized to measure
the position and attitude of the quadrotor, thus eliminating
the need for velocity measurements due to the state estima-
tion criteria. The tuning process for the proposed controller
is straightforward, relying on adaptive laws, speciﬁcally the
tuningof pi inadaptivelaws,DSCgainki,andHGOgains βi
ε .
In contrast, the comparative controller lacks these adaptive
law criteria and therefore requires extensive control design
through empirical tuning, making it a more challenging task
when applied across different scenarios. Moreover, it neces-
sitates accurate information regarding position and attitude,
along with their rates, for implementation. While quick con-
vergence can be ensured by setting ε to a sufﬁciently small
value, this approach may lead to increased control actions
that could violate the motor dynamics criteria due to exces-
sive thrust.
Despite achieving remarkable trajectory tracking perfor-
mance for the trajectories, the proposed control technique
does not incorporate techniques for handling input delays.
In contrast, the comparative controller accounts for input
delays; however, its backstepping-based control strategy can
result in an “explosion of complexity” due to the recursive
differentiation of system states and virtual control signals.
The proposed approach in this study addresses this challenge
by incorporating ﬁltering techniques.
The controller proposed in this study is based on the HGO,
which offers notable advantages in terms of rapid conver-
gence and robustness to high-frequency measurement noise,
both of which are essential for high-performance quadrotor
control. The application of HGO also facilitates the relax-
ation of assumptions regarding full state measurements and
exact knowledge of the system dynamics. However, effective
123

## Page 16

306
Page 16 of 18
N. Ahmed et al.
operation of the HGO requires accurate measurements of the
quadrotor’s output position and attitude prior to state and rate
estimation. Consequently, any ineffective onboard sensors
may result in inaccurate estimations, potentially leading to
quadrotor instability. Therefore, the design of a fault-tolerant
control system combined with the proposed controller is an
interesting direction for future research. Additionally, imple-
menting the controller in an experimental setup, developing
neural networks for system dynamics estimation, and estab-
lishing criteria for the optimal choice of ε are identiﬁed
as signiﬁcant limitations of the controller proposed in this
research.
5 Conclusion
In this research paper, a control algorithm based on an adap-
tive ﬁlter, adaptive gain, and dynamic surface control (DSC)
integrated with a nonlinear disturbance observer (DO) has
been presented to achieve trajectory tracking and attenua-
tion of multiple nonlinear bounded disturbances. To reﬁne
the control technique, a state estimation criterion based on a
high-gain observer (HGO) has been incorporated into the
controller. The implementation of this control algorithm
requires only measurable output information regarding the
position and attitude of the quadrotor UAV, as well as the
desired trajectory, thereby eliminating the need for velocity
measurements using onboard sensors. To demonstrate the
control effectiveness, stability analysis and simulation stud-
ies have been conducted, revealing successful achievement
of the quadrotor tracking control objectives for aggres-
sive and non-aggressive trajectories. Based on the control
development, stability analysis, and simulation results, it is
concluded that the controller is both effective and stable in
achieving the desired trajectory tracking control objectives
in uncertain environments characterized by multiple distur-
bances.
Appendix I
Helical trajectory
xdes(t) = 1
10 + 1
20t sin
 t
π

ydes(t) = 1
10 + 1
20t cos
 t
π

zdes(t) = 1
5 + 1
20t
Square trajectory
Thesquaretrajectoryisdividedintothreephases,i.e.,takeoff,
path following, and landing phase. During takeoff, the tra-
jectory is deﬁned as xdes(t) = 0, ydes(t) = 0, zdes(t) =
h
Tto t.
Deﬁne, Tto is takeoff-time, Ts is time of total segment, Tp
denotes time of each side, tp = t −Tto and Ts = Tp
4 . And
the landing phase is deﬁned as xdes(t) = 0, ydes(t) = 0
and zdes(t) = h −h
Tl tl where Tl is landing time and Ttotal =
Tto + Tp + Tlis the total ﬂight time. Furthermore, L is the
side length of the square and h is maximum height during
the trajectory. Therefore, path following trajectory is deﬁned
as follows:
xdes(t) =
⎧
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩
L
Ts tp,
0 ≤tp < Ts,
L,
Ts ≤tp < 2Ts,
L −L
Ts (tp −2Ts), 2Ts ≤tp < 3Ts,
0,
3Ts ≤tp ≤Tp,
ydes(t) =
⎧
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩
0,
0 ≤tp < Ts,
L
Ts (tp −Ts),
Ts ≤tp < 2Ts,
L,
2Ts ≤tp < 3Ts,
L −L
Ts (tp −3Ts), 3Ts ≤tp ≤Tp,
zdes(t) = h
Acknowledgements The authors thank the anonymous reviewers for
their valuable suggestions.
Funding This work was supported and funded by the Deanship of
Scientiﬁc Research at Imam Mohammad Ibn Saud Islamic University
(IMSIU) (grant number IMSIU-DDRSP2503).
Data availability statement This study did not generate new data. All
data used is presented in the paper.
Code availability statement No custom code was developed for this
study. Analyses were conducted using standard software tools.
Declarations
Declarations of interest None
Conﬂict of interest We have no Conﬂict of interest to disclose.
References
1. Zuo Z (2010) Trajectory tracking control design with command-
ﬁltered compensation for a quadrotor. IET Control Theory Appl
4:2343–2355. https://doi.org/10.1049/iet-cta.2009.0336
2. Lopez-Sanchez I, Moreno-Valenzuela J (2023) PID control of
quadrotor UAVS: a survey. Annu Rev Control 56:100900. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.arcontrol.2023.100900
3. Gün A (2023) Attitude control of a quadrotor using PID con-
troller based on differential evolution algorithm. Expert Syst Appl
229:120518. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2023.120518
123

## Page 17

Adaptive backstepping trajectory tracking control...
Page 17 of 18
306
4. Miranda-Colorado R, Aguilar LT (2020) Robust PID control of
quadrotors with power reduction analysis. ISA Trans 98:47–62.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isatra.2019.08.045
5. Wang S, Polyakov A, Zheng G (2022) Quadrotor stabilization
under time and space constraints using implicit PID controller. J
Franklin Inst 359:1505–1530. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfranklin.
2022.01.002
6. BaniAsad A, Pordal R, ShariﬁA, Nobahari H (2024) Attitude con-
trol of a 3-dof quadrotor platform using a linear quadratic integral
differential game approach. ISA Trans 148:515–527. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.isatra.2024.03.005
7. Ata B, Gencal MC (2024) Comparison of optimization approaches
on linear quadratic regulator design for trajectory tracking of a
quadrotor. Evol Intel. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12065-024-00928-
5
8. Cengiz SK, Ucun L (2022) Optimal controller design for
autonomous quadrotor landing on moving platform. Simul Model
Pract Theory 119:102565. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.simpat.2022.
102565
9. Ahmed N, Alrasheedi N (2025) Commanded ﬁlter-based robust
model reference adaptive control for quadrotor uav with state esti-
mation subject to disturbances. Drones (2504-446X)9. https://doi.
org/10.3390/drones9030181
10. Elkhatem AS, Engin SN (2022) Robust LQR and LQR-PI control
strategies based on adaptive weighting matrix selection for a UAV
position and attitude tracking control. Alex Eng J 61:6275–6292.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aej.2021.11.057
11. Zhao B, Xian B, Zhang Y, Zhang X (2014) Nonlinear robust
adaptive tracking control of a quadrotor UAV via immersion and
invariance methodology. IEEE Trans Ind Electron 62:2891–2902.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TIE.2014.2364982
12. Ahmed N, Ali Shah SA (2022) Adaptive output-feedback robust
active disturbance rejection control for uncertain quadrotor with
unknown disturbances. Eng Comput 39:1473–1491. https://doi.
org/10.1108/EC-02-2021-0098
13. Raza A et al (2021) Sliding mode control-based autonomous con-
trol of a tri-rotor unmanned aerial vehicle. Guidance Navig Control
1:2150013. https://doi.org/10.1142/S2737480721500138
14. Zhao B, Xian B, Zhang Y, Zhang X (2015) Nonlinear robust sliding
mode control of a quadrotor unmanned aerial vehicle based on
immersion and invariance method. Int J Robust Nonlinear Control
25:3714–3731. https://doi.org/10.1002/rnc.3290
15. Baek J, Kang M (2023) A synthesized sliding-mode con-
trol for attitude trajectory tracking of quadrotor UAV systems.
IEEE/ASME Trans Mechatron 28:2189–2199. https://doi.org/10.
1109/TMECH.2022.3230755
16. Chen L, Liu Z, Dang Q, Zhao W, Wang G (2022) Robust trajec-
tory tracking control for a quadrotor using recursive sliding mode
control and nonlinear extended state observer. Aerosp Sci Technol
128:107749. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ast.2022.107749
17. Siddiqui MN, Zhu X, Rasool H, Afzal MB, Ahmed N (2024)
Model-free low-power observer based robust trajectory tracking
control of UAV quadrotor with unknown disturbances. Aircr Eng
Aerosp Technol 96:316–328. https://doi.org/10.1108/AEAT-08-
2023-0212
18. Zhao Z, Cao D, Yang J, Wang H (2020) High-order sliding mode
observer-based trajectory tracking control for a quadrotor UAV
with uncertain dynamics. Nonlinear Dyn 102:2583–2596. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s11071-020-06050-2
19. Abhinav K, Kumar SR (2024) Modiﬁed super twisting control for
robust trajectory tracking and hovering of quadrotor. ISA Trans.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isatra.2024.07.024
20. Yao Q, Li Q, Huang M, Jahanshahi H (2024) Predeﬁned-time tra-
jectory tracking control of free-ﬂying space manipulator subject
to uncertainties and disturbances. Robot Auton Syst 177:104699.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2024.104699
21. Wang J, Alattas KA, Bouteraa Y, Moﬁd O, Mobayen S (2023)
Adaptive ﬁnite-time backstepping control tracker for quadrotor
UAV with model uncertainty and external disturbance. Aerosp Sci
Technol 133:108088. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ast.2022.108088
22. Liu J, Gai W, Zhang J, Li Y (2019) Nonlinear adaptive backstep-
ping with ESO for the quadrotor trajectory tracking control in the
multiple disturbances. Int J Control Autom Syst 17:2754–2768.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12555-018-0909-9
23. Wan M, Chen M, Lungu M (2023) Integral backstepping
sliding mode control for unmanned autonomous helicopters
based on neural networks. Drones 7:154. https://doi.org/10.3390/
drones7030154
24. Kapnopoulos A, Kazakidis C, Alexandridis A (2024) Quadro-
tor trajectory tracking based on backstepping control and radial
basis function neural networks. Results Control Optim 14:100335.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rico.2023.100335
25. Xie W, Cabecinhas D, Cunha R, Silvestre C (2021) Adaptive back-
stepping control of a quadcopter with uncertain vehicle mass,
moment of inertia, and disturbances. IEEE Trans Ind Electron
69:549–559. https://doi.org/10.1109/TIE.2021.3055181
26. Huang S, Huang J, Cai Z, Cui H (2021) Adaptive backstepping
sliding mode control for quadrotor UAV. Sci Progr 2021:3997648.
https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/3997648
27. Zhu Z, Cao S (2019) Back-stepping sliding mode control method
for quadrotor UAV with actuator failure. J Eng 2019:8374–8377.
https://doi.org/10.1049/joe.2019.1084
28. Tilki U, Erüst AC (2021) Robust adaptive backstepping global fast
dynamic terminal sliding mode controller design for quadrotors.
J Intell Robotic Syst 103:21. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10846-021-
01475-2
29. Andriën A, Lefeber E, Antunes D, Heemels W (2024) Model
predictive control for quadcopters with almost global trajectory
tracking guarantees. IEEE Trans Autom Control. https://doi.org/
10.1109/TAC.2023.3349098
30. Singh BK, Kumar A (2023) Model predictive control using LPV
approach for trajectory tracking of quadrotor UAV with external
disturbances. Aircr Eng Aerosp Technol 95:607–618. https://doi.
org/10.1108/AEAT-12-2021-0368
31. Bouaiss O, Mechgoug R, Taleb-Ahmed A, Brikel AE (2023) Adap-
tive neural network based compensation control of quadrotor for
robust trajectory tracking. Int J Adapt Control Signal Process
37:2772–2793. https://doi.org/10.1002/acs.3659
32. Lopez-Sanchez I, Pérez-Alcocer R, Moreno-Valenzuela J (2023)
Trajectory tracking double two-loop adaptive neural network con-
trol for a quadrotor. J Franklin Inst 360:3770–3799. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jfranklin.2023.01.029
33. Gu W, Primatesta S, Rizzo A (2024) Physics-informed neural
network for quadrotor dynamical modeling. Robot Auton Syst
171:104569. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2023.104569
34. Yu G, Reis J, Silvestre C (2023) Quadrotor neural network adaptive
control: design and experimental validation. IEEE Robotics Autom
Lett 8:2574–2581. https://doi.org/10.1109/LRA.2023.3254450
35. Jia K, Lin S, Du Y, Zou C, Lu M (2023) Research on route tracking
controller of quadrotor UAV based on fuzzy logic and RBF neu-
ral network. IEEE Access. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2023.
3322944
36. Jennan N, Mellouli EM (2024) Robust control for a drone quadrotor
using fuzzy logic-based fast terminal sliding mode control. J Braz
Soc Mech Sci Eng 46:1–13. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40430-024-
05023-5
37. Saldiran E, Inalhan G (2023) Incremental nonlinear dynamic
inversion-based trajectory tracking controller for an agile quadro-
tor: design, analysis, and ﬂight tests results, 195–230 (Springer).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-39767-7_8
38. Goodman JR, Beckers T, Colombo LJ (2023) Geometric control for
load transportation with quadrotor UAVS by elastic cables. IEEE
123

## Page 18

306
Page 18 of 18
N. Ahmed et al.
Trans Control Syst Technol. https://doi.org/10.1109/TCST.2023.
3296730
39. Khalid A et al (2023) Control schemes for quadrotor UAV: taxon-
omy and survey. ACM Comput Surv 56:1–32. https://doi.org/10.
1145/3617652
40. Li S, Duan N, Min H (2024) Trajectory tracking control for quadro-
tor unmanned aerial vehicle with input delay and disturbances.
Asian J Control 26:150–161. https://doi.org/10.1002/asjc.3192
41. Chen M, Xiong S, Wu Q (2019) Tracking ﬂight control of quadrotor
based on disturbance observer. IEEE Trans Syst Man Cybern Syst
51:1414–1423. https://doi.org/10.1109/TSMC.2019.2896891
42. Wang H, Chen M (2016) Trajectory tracking control for an indoor
quadrotor UAV based on the disturbance observer. Trans Inst Meas
Control 38:675–692. https://doi.org/10.1177/0142331215597057
43. Belmouhoub A, Medjmadj S, Bouzid Y, Derrouaoui S, Guiatni
M (2023) Enhanced backstepping control for an unconventional
quadrotor under external disturbances. Aeronaut J 127:627–650.
https://doi.org/10.1017/aer.2022.72
44. MengR,ChenS,HuaC,QianJ,SunJ(2020)Disturbanceobserver-
based output feedback control for uncertain quavs with input
saturation. Neurocomputing 413:96–106. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.neucom.2020.06.096
45. Flores G, González-Huitron V, Rodríguez-Mata A (2020) Output
feedback control for a quadrotor aircraft using an adaptive high
gain observer. Int J Control Autom Syst 18:1474–1486. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s12555-019-0944-6
46. Dierks T, Jagannathan S (2009) Output feedback control of a
quadrotor UAV using neural networks. IEEE Trans Neural Netw
21:50–66. https://doi.org/10.1109/TNN.2009.2034145
47. Daadi A, Boulebtinai H, Derrouaoui SH, Boudjema F (2022) Slid-
ing mode controller based on the sliding mode observer for a qball
2+ quadcopter with experimental validation. Int J Robot Control
Syst 2:332–356. https://doi.org/10.31763/ijrcs.v2i2.693
48. Li T, Zhao Z, Ding S, Su J (2023) Composite controller design for
quadrotor uavs with uncertainties and noises based on combined
kalman ﬁlter and gpio. IEEE Trans Aerosp Electron Syst. https://
doi.org/10.1109/TAES.2023.3329475
49. Kaba A, Kıyak E (2020) Optimizing a Kalman ﬁlter with an
evolutionary algorithm for nonlinear quadrotor attitude dynam-
ics. J Comput Sci 39:101051. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jocs.2019.
101051
50. Ju Y, Zhang Y, Zhu G (2023) Fuzzy adaptive linear active dis-
turbance rejection control for quadrotor load UAV based on
Kalman ﬁlter. IEEE Access. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.
2023.3317171
51. Patan MG, Caliskan F (2022) Sensor fault-tolerant control of
a quadrotor unmanned aerial vehicle. Proc Inst Mech Eng
Part G J Aerosp Eng 236:417–433. https://doi.org/10.1177/
09544100211015587
52. Kaba A (2021) Unscented Kalman ﬁlter based attitude estimation
of a quadrotor. J Aeronaut Space Technol 14:79–88
53. LeiB,LiuB,WangC(2024)Robustgeometriccontrolforaquadro-
tor uav with extended kalman ﬁlter estimation. Actuators. https://
doi.org/10.3390/act13060205
54. Mazare M, Taghizadeh M, Ghaf-Ghanbari P, Davoodi E (2024)
Robust fault detection and adaptive ﬁxed-time fault-tolerant control
for quadrotor uavs. Robot Auton Syst 179:104747. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.robot.2024.104747
55. Dam QT, Thabet REH, Ali SA, Guerin F (2023) Observer design
for a class of uncertain nonlinear systems with sampled-delayed
output using high-gain observer and low-pass ﬁlter: Application
for a quadrotor uav. IEEE Trans Ind Electron 71:933–942. https://
doi.org/10.1109/TIE.2023.3247786
56. Hua H, Fang Y, Zhang X, Lu B (2020) A novel robust observer-
based nonlinear trajectory tracking control strategy for quadrotors.
IEEE Trans Control Syst Technol 29:1952–1963. https://doi.org/
10.1109/TCST.2020.3024805
57. Ahmed N, Er MJ (2024) Command-ﬁltered robust trajectory track-
ingcontrolforaggressivemaneuversofquadrotoruavwithmultiple
unknown disturbances. Eng Sci Technol Int J 59:101858. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jestch.2024.101858
58. Wang D, Huang J (2005) Neural network-based adaptive dynamic
surface control for a class of uncertain nonlinear systems in strict-
feedback form. IEEE Trans Neural Netw 16:195–202. https://doi.
org/10.1109/TNN.2004.839354
59. Levant A (2003) Higher-order sliding modes, differentiation and
output-feedback control. Int J Control 76:924–941. https://doi.org/
10.1080/0020717031000099029
60. Chen W-H, Ballance DJ, Gawthrop PJ, O’Reilly J (2000) A non-
linear disturbance observer for robotic manipulators. IEEE Trans
Ind Electron 47:932–938
61. Khalil HK (2017) High-gain observers in nonlinear feedback con-
trol (SIAM). https://doi.org/10.1137/1.9781611974867
62. Atassi AN, Khalil HK (1999) A separation principle for the stabi-
lization of a class of nonlinear systems. IEEE Trans Autom Control
44:1672–1687. https://doi.org/10.1109/9.788534
Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds
exclusive rights to this article under a publishing agreement with the
author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted
manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of such
publishing agreement and applicable law.
123
