# s40435-026-02055-8.pdf

## Page 1

International Journal of Dynamics and Control          (2026) 14:113 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40435-026-02055-8
Disturbance observer-based fault-tolerant control of a quadrotor with
total rotor failure
Ahlem Nasr1,2 · Taouﬁk Ladhari2 · Salim Hadj Said2 · Sahbi Boubaker3
Received: 9 October 2025 / Revised: 13 February 2026 / Accepted: 20 February 2026
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature 2026
Abstract
This work proposes a disturbance observer (DOB)-based fault-tolerant control (FTC) approach for a quadcopter subject to total
rotor failure. The main goal is to develop a robust control strategy capable of maintaining partial ﬂight control and stabilizing
the quadcopter even after a complete failure of one rotor. This is a major challenge, as losing one rotor breaks the thrust
symmetry, leading to instability. The proposed approach joins two key components: a primary axis controller that enables the
quadrotor to regulate both its spatial position and inclination, and a DOB designed to estimate and compensate for disturbances
caused by rotor failures and cross-coupling effects. Leveraging nested control loops and quadratic programming optimization,
the control signals are dynamically allocated in response to real-time angular acceleration feedback, thereby reducing reliance
on an accurate plant model. The method is shown in high-ﬁdelity MATLAB/Simulink simulations to stabilize the quadcopter
post-failure, with comparative analysis indicating high performance over a used estimator in a prior investigation.
Keywords Fault estimation · Faulty rotor · FTC · High-gain disturbance observer · Quadrotor
1 Introduction
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs), commonly referred to
as drones, have rapidly emerged as one of the most cutting-
edge technologies of our area due to breakthroughs in ﬂight
dynamics, computational capabilities, sensor technologies,
and wireless communication systems. The Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) reports that the USA has 383,007
registered commercial drones as of April 2025 [1]. The
worldwide installed base of commercial drones continues to
B Ahlem Nasr
nasrahlem535@gmail.com
B Salim Hadj Said
salim.hadjsaid06@yahoo.fr
Taouﬁk Ladhari
taouﬁk.ladhari@enim.rnu.tn
Sahbi Boubaker
sboubaker@uj.edu.sa
1
University of Sousse, National Engineering School of Sousse,
Sousse 4002, Tunisia
2
University of Monastir, Laboratory of Automatic Electrical
Systems and Environment, Monastir 5019, Tunisia
3
College of Computer Science and Engineering, Jeddah, Saudi
Arabia
expand at a rate that exceeds other growth rates. It is now
crucial that modern control systems maintain operational
capability despite uncertainties, disturbances, and malfunc-
tioning. In particular, actuator failures are critical as they can
adversely affect system efﬁciency, operational safety, and
dynamic stability. Such defects often culminate in impaired
control performance or catastrophic system failure and may
occur due to environmental factors or unexpected operational
conditions, among others. Rotor failure presents a tougher
challenge that offers more practical beneﬁts. This is because
the most favorable course of action when dealing with a
severely damaged rotor during practical operations is to turn
itoff.Consequently,thedevelopmentoffault-tolerantcontrol
(FTC) methods for various types of UAVs has earned signiﬁ-
cant attention as an essential approach for ensuring continued
functionality under compromising conditions [2–11]. The
choicetoswitchoffaseverelydamagedrotorbecomesadvan-
tageous because it stops vibrations from rotor imbalance. The
following solution to address this problem is introduced by
[12].
In [9], a fault-tolerant control method uses deep reinforce-
ment learning to deal with such errors. The method uses
a low-level control strategy and integrates PID lift correc-
tion into the actor-critic structure, which improves control
accuracy and robustness, allowing the Unmanned Aerial
0123456789().: V,-vol 
123

## Page 2

113 
Page 2 of 13
A. Nasr et al.
Vehicle (UAV) to maintain high-speed ﬂight when the rotor
fails while authors in [13] propose a two-part solution, con-
sisting of sliding mode control to maintain ﬂight stability
and dynamic control distribution to redistribute forces to
the remaining full rotors while maintaining maximum rotor
speed limits. In [14], a fault-tolerant control (FTC) approach
that uses model predictive control to handle such faults with-
out controller switching is introduced. The designed FTC
includes fault detection and diagnosis module as well as fault
estimation scheme using a two-stage Kalman ﬁlter.
Fault-tolerant control systems applied to UAVs consist of
two main components: fault detection and isolation (FDI),
and fault estimation [15–18]. Accurate and timely estima-
tion of actuator faults is pivotal for the effective design of
fault-tolerant control (FTC) copes, which enables the con-
trol system to adaptively mitigate faults and achieve desired
performance benchmarks. Among the numerous methods
for the estimation of faults, observer-based methods have
received considerable attention due to their ability to recon-
struct non-measurable system states and fault signals [6, 14,
19–23]. In [2, 3], the authors propose a uniform passive fault-
tolerant control (FTC) strategy for a quadrotor subject to
complete rotor failures. In such case, rotor faults are modeled
as lumped disturbances and estimated through a ﬁltering-
based approach applied to the time derivatives of the system
states. The resulting estimates are then incorporated into the
control law, which employs a dynamic control allocation
strategy to avoid switching between nominal and faulty oper-
ating modes. Inspired by the aforementioned framework, this
paper proposes a disturbance observer–based fault-tolerant
control (DOB-FTC) scheme aimed at accurately estimating
and compensating actuator malfunctions. While preserving
the primary axis solution and the dynamic control allocation
strategy adopted in [2, 3], the fault estimation mechanism is
replaced by a robust nonlinear disturbance observer instead
of the ﬁltering-based estimator relying on state derivatives.
By exploiting the fast convergence and strong robustness
properties of DOB, the proposed approach enables precise
and timely estimation of actuator faults, which are seam-
lessly integrated into the FTC framework to enhance overall
system performance under complete rotor failure conditions.
The main contributions of this paper are summarized as fol-
lows:
• A nonlinear disturbance observer is developed to accu-
rately and rapidly estimate actuator faults arising from
complete rotor failure.
• Compared to the estimator used in [3], the proposed
observation scheme exhibits improved robustness against
modeling uncertainties and measurement noise.
• The estimated fault signals are seamlessly integrated
into a nested position–attitude–rate fault-tolerant control
architecture combined with a quadratic programming-
based control allocation scheme.
• Comprehensive simulation studies, including compar-
ative evaluations with existing estimation-based meth-
ods, demonstrate superior tracking performance and
enhanced fault recovery capability of the proposed
approach. These improvements are quantitatively vali-
dated through multiple performance metrics.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: Sect.2
delineates the problem formulation and mathematical model-
ing of the quadrotor with actuator faults. Section3 elaborates
on the development and stability analysis of the proposed
high-gain disturbance observer. Section4 outlines the FTC
methodology that uses several control loops and its imple-
mentation for the quadrotor model. Section5 presents simu-
lation results alongside comparative evaluations, and sect. 6
summarizes the paper by presenting the key ﬁndings and
outlining potential avenues for future research exploration.
2 Quadrotor modeling
This section presents the quadrotor model in a speciﬁc form
that simpliﬁes the design of the disturbance observer. The
fundamental principles of multicopter design are detailed in
[24].
2.1 Dynamical model of a healthy quadrotor
Let a body frame reference B =

xB yB zB

, located at
the quadcopter’s center of mass (see Fig. 1). So, the linear
velocity vector is given by V =

Vx Vy Vz
T , and angu-
lar velocities are grouped in ω as follows: ω ≜

p q r
T .
Consider also the terrestrial frame axes

xT , yT , zT

.
Let now Rtb the rotation matrix that transforms the body
frame B to the terrestrial frame be as follows:
Rtb =
⎡
⎣
cos θ cos ψ cos ψ sin θ sin φ −sinψ cos θ h1
cos θ sin ψ sin ψ sin θ sin φ + cosψ cos φ h2
−sinθ
sin φ cos θ
h3
⎤
⎦
The quadrotor’s state space model can be described in the
frame body by the following expression [2]:
⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩
˙P = V
˙V = g −1
m n3Fp
˙n3 = −n3 × Rtbω
˙ω = J −1(−ω × Jω) + J −1τ
(1)
where
123

## Page 3

Disturbance observer-based fault-tolerant control of a quadrotor...
Page 3 of 13
  113 
Fig. 1 Quadrotor structure
• P ∈R3 and V ∈R3 are, respectively, the position and
linear velocity of the quadcopter,
• n3 ≜

h1 h2 h3
T ∈R3 represents the primary axis in
the terrestrial frame,
• Fp ∈R is the thrust force generated by the four rotors in
the direction of zB-axis,
• τ =

τp τq τr
T ∈R3 is the torque control vector of the
quadrotor,
• J ≜diag(Jxx, Jyy, Jzz) ∈R3×3 represents the quad-
copter’s moment of inertia,
• g =

0 0 g
T ∈R3 is the gravity vector,
• m ∈R is the quadcopter’s mass.
Remark 1 It is notiﬁable that the primary axis, denoted as n3,
isavectorthatremainsﬁxedrelativetothequadcopter’sbody,
speciﬁcally aligned with the downward, pointing zB axis of
the body frame, but is represented within the earth (inertial)
frame for control purposes. The position controller leverages
position information to generate this desired primary axis,
n3d in conjunction with the desired vertical velocity Vzd,
effectively translating position commands into orientation
targets. Controlling the orientation of this primary axis is
fundamentallytiedtothequadcopter’sabilitytoregulateboth
its spatial position and inclination, since the thrust direction
(aligned with n3) determines how the vehicle moves and tilts
in three-dimensional space
Now,considerthewholethrustvector T =

T1 T2 T3 T4
T,
which includes the thrust arising from each rotor and u =

Fp τ T T is the virtual control input vector. The transforma-
tion from T to u is given as follows:
u = MT
(2)
Fig. 2 Rotor index and body frame orientation
where
M =
⎡
⎢⎢⎣
1
1
1
1
−l sin ρ1 −l sin ρ2 −l sin ρ3 −l sin ρ4
l cos ρ1
l cos ρ2
l cos ρ3
l cos ρ4
c
−c
c
−c
⎤
⎥⎥⎦
l ∈R+ is the distance between the center of mass of the
quadcopter and each rotor and c represents the ratio between
the aerodynamic reaction torque and the thrust produced by a
rotor, i.e., c = km/k f , where km denotes the rotor drag (reac-
tion torque) coefﬁcient associated with aerodynamic losses
due to blade drag and k f denotes the rotor thrust coefﬁcient
associated with lift generation. This formulation allows the
reaction torque to be expressed directly as a function of the
thrust. As shown in Fig. 2, ρi for i = 1, .., 4 are the angle
between the center of mass of the quadrotor ox B and the
arm of rotor i.
2.2 Accounting for rotor faults
We assume that the quadrotor system is subject to an actuator
fault. The latter can be considered an unknown disturbance
d. Consequently, the virtual control u can be rewritten in the
following form:
u = E MT −d
(3)
where E = I4 and d =

d1 d2 d3 d4
T . Moreover, d can be
expressed with respect to the thrust vector T by:
d = M(I4 −λ)T
(4)
with λ = diag(λ1, λ2, λ3, λ4) is the rotor efﬁciency matrix.
Each performance coefﬁcient λi ∈[0, 1]; if λi = 1, then the
123

## Page 4

113 
Page 4 of 13
A. Nasr et al.
i-th rotor is perfect and performs optimally (di = 0), and
if λi = 0, then the i-th rotor is completely faulty and non-
functional (ui = 0).
Therefore, referring to (1) and taking into account (3), the
dynamic quadrotor system depends in d as follows
⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩
˙P = V
˙V = g −1
m n3(E1MT −d1)
˙n3 = −n3 · Rtbω
˙ω = J −1(−ω × Jω) + J −1(E2MT −d2)
(5)
where d1 = d1; d2 =

d2 d3 d4
T ; E1 =

1 0 0 0

and
E2 =

03×1 I3

, with I3 is 3 × 3 identity matrix.
In a more compact form, the quadrotor model (5) can be
expressed as:
⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩
˙P = V
˙V = G1(n3, T ) + ¯d1
˙n3 = −n3 · Rtbω
˙ω = G2(ω, T ) + ¯d2
(6)
where:
⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩
G1(n3, T ) = g −1
m n3E1MT
G2(ω, T ) = J −1(−ω × Jω) + J −1E2MT
¯d1 = 1
m n3d1
¯d2 = −J −1d2
(7)
2.3 Main objectives and methodology
The primary objective is to reconﬁgure the control system
immediately upon detecting a motor failure, ensuring sub-
optimal tracking of reference trajectories. However, in the
event of a sudden and complete rotor failure, perfect trajec-
tory tracking becomes impossible as losing one rotor in a
quadrotor forces the sacriﬁce of a degree of freedom (the
roll). The proposed approach involves generating, when one
unknown rotor is completely fault, a ﬁctitious control signal
u1 = [Fp τp τq]T via the three remaining torque rotors to
maintain position tracking (x, y, z) even if the drone experi-
ences rotation around its axis.
To achieve this goal, ﬁrstly, a precise fault detection and
amplitude estimation should be performed using a dedicated
observer. In particular, a high-gain disturbance observer is
selected to reconstruct abrupt rotor failure. Subsequently,
an adaptive control reconﬁguration will be implemented to
compensate for the failure. In this case, nested loops should
be used to maintain Euler angles and normalized accelera-
tion around their ﬁctive trajectories. In addition, quadratic
programming-based dynamic control allocation is adopted
to avoid switching between safety and faulty modes.
3 Rotor fault estimation with a disturbance
observer
This section is devoted to the development of a disturbance
observer capable of estimating both unknown disturbance
signals: d1 and d2. Firstly, by referring to (6) and (7), and by
inspiring from [25], one can extract the intermediate compo-
nents of ¯d as follows:
 ¯d1 = ˙V −g + 1
m n3E1MT
¯d2 = ˙ω −J −1(−ω × Jω) −J −1E2MT
(8)
Unfortunately ˙V and ˙ω are inaccessible to measurement, and
even the time derivative of V and ω cannot be exploited
because the strong sensibility to the unavoidable noise mea-
surement. Another alternative consists in using the auxiliary
variables σ1 and σ1 to avoid the temporal derivation. Let:
 ¯d1 = σ1 + θ1V
¯d2 = σ2 + θ2ω
(9)
where the dynamics of the auxiliary variables σ1 and σ2 are
as follows:
 ˙σ1 = −θ1(σ1 + θ1V ) −θ1[G1(T , n3)]
˙σ2 = −θ2(σ2 + θ2ω) −θ2[G2(T , ω)]
(10)
Note that θ1 and θ2 are the observer gains.
Now, from equation (10), we can easily extract the expres-
sion of the estimated fault as follows:

ˆd1 = m[n3]+ · ˆ¯d1
ˆd2 = J · ˆ¯d2
(11)
For θ1,2 ≥1, a fast convergence of ˆ¯di to ¯di is allowed. The
disturbance error dynamics is developed as follows:
Let : ˜d1 = ¯d1 −ˆ¯d1
⇒˙˜d1 = ˙¯d1 −(˙σ1 + θ1 ˙V )
= ˙¯d1 + θ1(σ1 + θ1V ) + θ1[G1(.)] −θ1([G1(.)] + ¯d1)
= ˙¯d1 + θ1( ˆd1 −θ1V + θ1V ) −θ1 ¯d1
⇒˙˜d1 = ˙¯d1 −θ1 ˜d1
.
(12)
Let : ˜d2 = ¯d2 −ˆ¯d2
⇒˙˜d2 = ˙¯d2 −(˙σ2 + θ2 ˙ω)
= ˙¯d2 + θ2(σ2 + θ2ω) + θ2[G2(.)] −θ2([G2(.)] + ¯d2)
= ˙¯d2 + θ2( ˆd2 −θ2ω + θ2ω) −θ2 ¯d2
⇒˙˜d2 = ˙¯d2 −θ2 ˜d2
.
So, for i = 1, 2, it is specializes as follows:
˙˜di = ˙¯di −θi ˜di
→
˙˜di + θi ˜di = ˙¯di .
(13)
123

## Page 5

Disturbance observer-based fault-tolerant control of a quadrotor...
Page 5 of 13
  113 
which arises the following solution:
˜di(t) = ˜di(0)e−θit +
 t
0 e−θi(t−τ) ˙¯di(τ) dτ ;
(14)
thereafter, one obtains the following inequality:
∥˜di(t)∥≤∥˜di(0)∥e−θit + δi
 t
0 e−θi(t−τ) dτ .
(15)
The integral quantity in the right side evaluates to:
 t
0 e−θi(t−τ) dτ = 1
θi

1 −e−θit
.
(16)
Substituting (16) in (15) gives:
∥˜di(t)∥≤∥˜di(0)∥e−θit + δi
θi

1 −e−θit
.
(17)
For a large θi (i.e., θi ≫1), δi
θi becomes very small, and e−θit
decays rapidly with respect to the time t, it arises:
∥˜di(t)∥≤1
θi

∥˜di(0)∥+ δi

.
(18)
where δi = sup ∥˙¯di∥.
Let ∥˜d(t)∥= ∥˜d1(t)∥+ ∥˜d2(t)∥, δ = δ1 + δ2 and θ =
min(θ1, θ2), As a result, the following inequality emerges
∥˜d(t)∥≤1
θ

∥˜d(0)∥+ δ

(19)
with δ = supi=1,2 ∥˙¯di∥. Consequently:
∥˜d∥−−−→
θ→∞0
⇒
ˆd −−−→
θ→∞d. .
(20)
Remark 2 Unlike the passive fault-tolerant control frame-
work proposed in [3], which relies on lumped disturbance
estimation using a low-pass ﬁlter whose parameters are tuned
through a trial-and-error procedure and whose effectiveness
is limited to a speciﬁc frequency bandwidth, we have intro-
duced a nonlinear disturbance observer speciﬁcally designed
to accurately estimate actuator faults arising from complete
rotor failure. The estimates should now actively integrated
into a fault-tolerant control scheme, in order to enhance the
robustness and tracking performance of the quadrotor UAV
under severe fault conditions and the presence of measure-
ment noises.
4 Fault-tolerant control design
This section examines, at the ﬁrst, the entire tolerant control
scheme, which includes multiple internal loops. Subse-
quently, the control law for each internal loop is described in
detail within its own subsection.
4.1 Global structure of control
The complete control scheme is illustrated in Fig. 3 and
consists of four nested loops combined with a disturbance
observer. The outermost loop is responsible for position
tracking and produces the normalized acceleration n3, which
serves as the input to the subsequent attitude controller. The
angular rate controller, receiving the virtual angular rate ref-
erence arising from the attitude controller and the measured
angular rate, outputs the desired control signal ud. Before
reaching the allocation loop, each signal is adjusted using the
rotor fault estimate. Finally, the allocation loop computes the
desired torques to be applied to the quadrotor model.
4.2 Position controller
The position controller includes a horizontal position channel
(x, y) and the vertical position z. Based on the desired Pd =
[xd yd zd]T the position controller generates the required n3,
which contains h∗
1 and h∗
2. Precisely, in order to obtain the
desired primary axis expressed in the Earth frame instead of
thebodyframe, aPIDcontroller is employedinthehorizontal
position channel, whose design is as follows:
a∗= K p(Pd −P) + Kd(Vd −V ) .
(21)
Then, it is meant to be used directly for the attitude controller.
Thus, n∗
3 can be obtained as:
n∗
3 = −a∗−g
∥a∗−g∥.
(22)
The utility of generating and controlling the "primary axis"
n3 iscrucialforaquadcopter’sabilitytomaintainequilibrium
and continue its mission in the event of a complete failure of
one or more rotors [3].
4.3 Attitude controller
In order to design the attitude controller, we have to derive
the expressions of ˙h1 and ˙h2 [2]. From (1):
˙h1
˙h2

=
 0
h3
−h3 0
 cos ψ −sin ψ
sin ψ
cos ψ
 cos θ
0
0
cos φ
 p
q

=
 sin ψ
−cos ψ

h3 p cos θ +
cos ψ
sin ψ

h3q cos φ
The aim here is to design the desired angular speed
ω∗= [pd, qd,rd]T . So, let their expressions are given by
123

## Page 6

113 
Page 6 of 13
A. Nasr et al.
Fig. 3 FTC scheme for rotor faulty quadrotor
the following:
⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩
pd = −kn3 ·

h2
1 + h2
2 · sin(ψ −β)
qd = −kn3 ·

h2
1 + h2
2 · cos(ψ −β)
rd = −kr(ψ −ψd)
(23)
where ˜h1 = h1 −h∗
1, ˜h2 = h2 −h∗
2, and tan β = ˜h2
˜h1 , which
leads to obtain β = arctan 2(˜h2, ˜h1).
The purpose of the attitude controller is to let n3 reach n∗
3.
Accordingly, h1 and h2 lean toward h∗
1 and h∗
2, respectively.
In order to demonstrate stability of the attitude loop, consider
the following Lyapunov function:
V = 1
2

˜h2
1 + ˜h2
2

.
(24)
when evaluating its time derivative, one obtains:
˙V = ˜h1 ˙˜h1 + ˜h2 ˙˜h2
= h3

˜h2
1 + ˜h2
2

(cos β sin ψ −sin β cos ψ)pd
+(cos β cos ψ + sin β sin ψ)qd

.
(25)
taking into account that:
⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩
cos β =
˜h1

˜h2
1+˜h2
2
sin β =
˜h2

˜h2
1+˜h2
2
(26)
Through mathematical development from (25), the following
result emerges:
˙V = −2kn3h3V .
(27)
Thus, it is sufﬁcient to choose kn3 > 0 to obtain the asymp-
totic stability of this loop.
4.4 Angular rate controller
The altitude channel produces the required thrust force F∗
p
and the required torque τ ∗. As the yaw channel is uncontrol-
lable, it will be give up.
For simplicity of presentation of the altitude control law,
let us consider in what follows: x1 =

h1 h2
T , x2 =

vz p q
T and ud1 =
F∗
p τ ∗
p τ ∗
q
T .
A reduced state space model, inherited from (6), is written
in the following expression:
 ˙x1 = A1x2
˙x2 = A2x2 + D2 + B2u1 + ¯d
(28)
where:
A1 =
0 −cos ψ sin θ sin φ + sinψ cos θ cos θ cos ψ
0 −sin ψ sin θ sin φ −cosψ cos φ cos θ sin ψ

;
A2 =
⎡
⎢⎣
0
0
0
0
0
−Jzz−Jyy
Jxx
r
0 −Jxx−Jzz
Jyy
r
0
⎤
⎥⎦; B2 =
⎡
⎢⎣
−h3
m
0
0
0
1
Jxx
0
0
0
1
Jyy
⎤
⎥⎦;
D2 =

g 0 0
T
Let tracking errors deﬁned as: ˜x1 = x1 −x1d and ˜x2 =
x2 −x2d.
Afeedbacklinearizationcontrollawcorrespondingto(28)
is designed as follows:
ud1 = B−1
2

˙x2d −(K1 + AT
1 )˜x1 + f2(x, ˆd)

.
(29)
where f2(x, ˆd) = −K2 ˜x2 −A2x2 −D2 −ˆd.
Note that the matrix B2 is invertible as long as h3 ̸= 0.
Theorem 1 Consider the system (28) and the control law
(29), the tracking error converges to a bounded limit, which
can be arbitrarily minimized by the judicious choice of design
parameters K1 and K2.
123

## Page 7

Disturbance observer-based fault-tolerant control of a quadrotor...
Page 7 of 13
  113 
Analysis of the tracking error convergence is detailed in the
proof in Appendix A.
4.5 Rotor dynamics compensation
Rotor dynamic compensation is essential in quadcopter sys-
tems to improve ﬂight stability and control accuracy. Due to
the rapid and complex motion of the rotors, quadcopters are
susceptible to various dynamic factors such as aerodynamic
disturbances, rotor drag, sudden loads, or wind direction
changes.Rotordynamiccompensationusesadvancedcontrol
algorithms and precise modeling to predict and compensate
for these effects in real time. At this level, aproportional
action is adopted for the compensation of the rotor dynamics.
Yet, one can write:
uss = Kr(u −u0)
(30)
where u = ud −ˆd, with ˆd is the estimated disturbance,
kr ∈R+ is a positive gain, u represents the desired input
vector, and u0 represents the estimation of u that cannot
be acquired directly. By compensating for these dynamic
behaviors, the quadcopter can maintain stable ﬂight, respond
quickly to control commands, and perform complex maneu-
vers more reliably.
4.6 Control allocation
In order to avoid the switching between the free faulty case
(T = M−1u) and the faulty case (T = (E1M)+u1), the con-
trol problem is transformed into a quadratic programming
optimization problem. So, the control arises from the mini-
mization of the following cost function:
min
0≤Ti≤Tmax
1
2(uss −MT )T W(uss −MT )
(31)
with W = diag((ω f , ωτp, ωτq, ωτr ) being the weighting
matrix which represents the priority of each input element.
We consider ωτp, ωτq ≫ω f ≫ωτr .
Assuming that the yaw channel is controllable, equation
(30) is explicitly solved without constraints as follows
∂1
2 (uss−MT)TW(uss−MT)
∂T
= 0 .
(32)
which leads to
(uss −MT)TW M = 0. .
(33)
So, the control law T can be computed by the following
explicit expression:
T = (MT W M)+(MT W)uss
(34)
Table 1 Drone parameters
Parameter
Value
Unit
Description
m
0.7
kg
Total mass of the drone
Jxx
0.0056
kg · m2
Roll moment of inertia
Jyy
0.0056
kg · m2
Pitch moment of inertia
Jzz
0.0104
kg · m2
Yaw moment of inertia
l
0.0125
m
Arm length
c
0.0166
N/(rad/s)
Thrust coefﬁcient
Source: Example drone parameters
Table 2 Quadrotor controller and observer design parameters
Parameter
Value
K p
diag([10.5, 10.5, 15.75])
Kd
diag([4, 4, 6])
kn3
30
K1

diag(12, 12) 02×1

K2
20 × diag([12, 12, 3.6])
Kr
1
W = (ω f , ωτp, ωτq , ωτr )
diag([1, 20, 20, 0.01])
θ1 = θ2
10
However,theallocationloopcangeneratepoorlyconditioned
control signals. So, each torque Ti should be constrained by
0 ≤Ti ≤Tmax.
5 Simulation results
5.1 Disturbance observer-based FTC with free
measurement noise
This section is devoted to validate the global control structure
depicted in Fig. 3. Control laws (21), (22), (23), (29) and (34)
with disturbance observer (9), (10), and (11) are applied to
the dynamic model of the quadrotor described by (5) with
nominal parameters illustrated in Table 1.
Design parameters of controllers and the disturbance
observer are given in Table 2.
The quadrotor is made to track a square trajectory which
is described as follows:
xd =
⎧
⎨
⎩
0,
0 < t ≤1s
3,
1s < t ≤6s
0,
0 > 6s
(35)
yd =
⎧
⎨
⎩
0,
0 < t ≤4s
1,
4s < t ≤8s
0,
0 > 8s
(36)
zd = −2
(37)
123

## Page 8

113 
Page 8 of 13
A. Nasr et al.
-1
0
1
h1
h1d
h1
-1
0
1
h2
h2d
h2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
0.5
1
h3
h3d
h3
Fig. 4 Primary axis tracking
Initial conditions of the quadrotor’s states are set to 0 except
h3(0) = 1, while initial conditions of the disturbance
observer are set to 0, i.e., σi(0) = 0 for i = 1..6. Figure4
shows tracking performances of the virtual primary axis (hi,
for i = 1..3), while Figs. 5 and 6 illustrate, respectively,
3D and the time evolution of the coordinate position with
respect to the desired square proﬁle. Control torque signals
are given in Fig. 7, and the estimate of complete rotor failure
is visualized in Fig. 8.
Fig.4 demonstrates how the primary axis components
are aligned with their references, enabling accurate track-
ing performance of the position coordinates x,y, and z (see
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
1
2
3
x[m]
xref
x
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
0.5
1
y[m]
yref
y
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
-2
-1
0
z[m]
zref
z
Fig. 6 Position tracking performances
Figs. 5 and 6). A complete failure is induced in the ﬁrst
rotor at t = 5.5s by remotely disabling its control signal.
As illustrated in Fig. 7, this causes the thrust output T1 to
drop to zero. To compensate for the resulting imbalance,
the torque outputs of the remaining three motors are sys-
tematically reduced. This adjustment ensures that the virtual
control vector u1d closely approximates its fault-free coun-
terpart. Consequently, the drone maintains equilibrium and
ﬂight stability while mitigating destabilizing effects caused
by the thrust loss of the ﬁrst rotor. This thrust reduction strat-
egy exempliﬁes adaptive control to preserve quasi-optimal
performance during partial system failure. Figure8 clearly
Fig. 5 3D trajectory tracking
without noise measurement
123

## Page 9

Disturbance observer-based fault-tolerant control of a quadrotor...
Page 9 of 13
  113 
Fig. 7 Thrust response of
motors: nominal versus faulty
case
Fig. 8 Rotor fault estimation
123

## Page 10

113 
Page 10 of 13
A. Nasr et al.
Fig. 9 Position tracking
performance in presence of
noise measurements
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
-2
0
2
ex[m]
ex[Ke2023]
ex[DOB-FTC]
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
-1
0
1
ey[m]
ey[Ke2023]
ey[DOB-FTC]
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
-1
0
1
2
ez[m]
ez[Ke2023]
ez[DOB-FTC]
Fig. 10 x–y–z Position tracking errors in the presence of measurement
noise
demonstrates that the observer implemented in this study efﬁ-
ciently detected the motor fault and precisely indicated the
exact moment when it occurred. This proves the observer’s
real-time fault diagnosis feature, enabling automatic identi-
ﬁcation and potential avoidance of system breakdowns. In
conclusion, the stability of the quadrotor is provided by two
main actions: disturbance compensation by injecting the esti-
mated disturbance signal ˆd into the control law (see Fig. 3)
and quadratic optimization in the control allocation loop.
Although altitude controller gives up the roll angle, resulting
in yawing of the drone, the drone continues to follow the
desired setpoint even with a complete rotor failure.
These results were obtained under the assumption of
noise-free measurements. However, in real-world conditions,
the output is invariably affected by measurement noises. The
second simulation scenario that we should provide in the next
sectionfocusesonasensitivityanalysisofourcontrolscheme
to such noise, with the results compared against those arising
from a recent approach [3].
5.2 Disturbance observer-based FTC in the presence
of measurement noises
In this section, output vector of the quadrotor model is
affected by an additive measurement noise vector η. So, one
can rewrite the output as follows:
y = Cx + η
(38)
The noise power of each output is selected to 10−3. The
parameters θ1 and θ2 of the disturbance observer, as well as
the controller parameters, are assigned the same values as in
the noise-free case.
Simulation ﬁndings are provided in Figs. 9, 10 and 11. As
illustrated in Figs. 9 and 10, the time evolution of the quadro-
tor position and the associated tracking errors shows that the
x, y, and z-position trajectories accurately track their respec-
tive reference signals up to t = 5.5, s. At this time instant,
a sudden complete rotor failure is introduced. Following
fault detection, the control system is automatically reconﬁg-
ured, and stable ﬂight is successfully maintained using the
remaining three rotors. However, after the fault occurrence,
123

## Page 11

Disturbance observer-based fault-tolerant control of a quadrotor...
Page 11 of 13
  113 
Fig. 11 Rotor fault estimation
in presence of noise
measurements
a slight degradation in tracking performance is shown, par-
ticularly along the z-axis. This behavior is expected and can
be attributed to the weighting strategy adopted in the con-
trol allocation scheme, where higher priority is assigned to
horizontal position tracking (ωτp = ωτq = 20) compared to
vertical motion (ω f = 1).
Furthermore,
the
quantitative
performance
indices
reported in Table 3, including the RMSE and MAE metrics,
clearly demonstrate that the proposed DOB-FTC strategy
yields more accurate and smoother tracking trajectories com-
pared to the passive FTC approach presented in [3], which
relies on ﬁltered derivatives and exhibits high noise sensitiv-
ity. The observed performance gains are primarily due to the
improved fault estimation accuracy of the proposed nonlinear
disturbance observer, as shown in Fig. 11 and corroborated
by the quantitative results in Table 4.
6 Conclusion
The present study presents a fault-tolerant control (FTC)
strategy that uses a disturbance observer (DOB) to deal
with quadcopters that are experiencing total rotor failure.
Table 3 Quantitative tracking error metrics for the x-position
Method
RMSE
MAE
Emax
ex[Ke2023]
0.976
0.642
2.663
ex[DOB-FTC]
0.961
0.635
2.618
Boldvaluesindicatethebestperformanceamongthecomparedmethods
Table 4 Quantitative estimation error metrics for d1
Method
RMSE
MAE
emax
ed1[Ke2023]
1.7911
1.2369
5.5959
ed1[DOB-FTC]
0.435
0.212
1.714
Boldvaluesindicatethebestperformanceamongthecomparedmethods
This issue presents a signiﬁcant challenge because of the
loss of thrust symmetry and inherent instability. The sug-
gested method incorporates the resilience of the primary axis
controller with a DOB that can estimate and balance out per-
turbations arising from rotor failure, noise measurements,
and cross-coupling effects. Using several cascaded loops,
the method dynamically allocates control inputs without
requiring a high-precision plant model. High-ﬁdelity MAT-
123

## Page 12

113 
Page 12 of 13
A. Nasr et al.
LAB/Simulink simulations have shown that the combined
cascade controllers with disturbance observer effectively sta-
bilizes the quadcopter and maintains partial ﬂight control
even after a complete unknown rotor failure. The result con-
ﬁrms accurate tracking performance despite the presence of
noise measurements and abrupt actuator failure. The perfor-
mance superiority of the proposed method over very recent
method is highlighted by comparative analysis, particularly
in terms of noise measurement sensibility and trajectory
tracking accuracy.
Future work will focus on expanding our approach to
scenarios with multiple simultaneous failures and incorpo-
rating real-world experimental validation to further validate
the robustness of the proposed control strategy.
Appendix: Closed-loop stability analysis
The closed-loop stability is examined by integrating the
designed control law into the state space model and rig-
orously analyzing the tracking error dynamics through a
Lyapunov-based approach. The stability proof involves sub-
stituting the control strategy into the system’s mathematical
representation, then employing a candidate Lyapunov func-
tion to assess asymptotic stability of the tracking error,
thereby validating the controller’s ability to maintain desired
performance under dynamic conditions.
Proof By substituting the control law (29) in the reduced
quadrotor model (28), one obtains:
˙x2 = ˙x2d −(K1 + AT
1 )˜x1 −K2 ˜x2 −ˆd + ¯d
(1)
Subtracting ˙x2d gives:
˙˜x2 = −(K1 + AT
1 )˜x1 −K2 ˜x2 + ˜d
(2)
with ˜d = ¯d −ˆd.
In order to demonstrate the convergence of the tracking
error, we consider the following Lyapunov function:
V = 1
2 ˜xT
1 ˜x1 + 1
2 ˜xT
2 ˜x2 + 1
2
˜dT ˜d
(3)
its temporal derivative gives:
˙V = ˜xT
1 ˙˜x1 + ˜xT
2 ˙˜x2 + ˜dT ˙˜d
(4)
Taking into account that ˙x1d = A1x2d and by substituting
(3) into (4):
˙V = ˜xT
1 A1 ˜x2 + ˜xT
2 (−(K1 + AT
1 )˜x1 −K2 ˜x2 + ˜d) + ˜dT ˙˜d (5)
After simpliﬁcations, it arises:
˙V = −˜xT
2 K2 ˜x2 −˜xT
2 K1 ˜x1 + ˜xT
2 ˜d + ˜dT ( ˙¯d −˙ˆd)
(6)
Using Young’s inequality, it arrives that:
|˜xT
1 K1 ˜x2| ≤ϵ1
2 ∥˜x1∥2 + ∥K1∥2
2ϵ1
∥˜x2∥2
(7)
and |˜xT
2 ˜d| ≤ϵ2
2 ∥˜x2∥2 + 1
2ϵ2
∥˜d∥2
(8)
where ϵ1 and ϵ2 are positive constants.
Substituting these bounds into ˙V yields:
˙V ≤−˜xT
2 K2 ˜x2 + ϵ1
2 ∥˜x1∥2 + ∥K1∥2
2ϵ1 ∥˜x2∥2
+ ϵ2
2 ∥˜x2∥2 +
1
2ϵ2 ∥˜d∥2 + ˜dT ˙˜d
.
(9)
when grouping terms multiplying ∥˜x2∥2, one obtains:
˙V ≤−

λmin(K2) −∥K1∥2
2ϵ1
−ϵ2
2

∥˜x2∥2
−ϵ1
2 ∥˜x1∥2 +
1
2ϵ2 ∥˜d∥2 + ˜dT ˙˜d
.
(10)
Let α1 = ϵ1
2 and α2 = λmin(K2)−∥K1∥2
2ϵ1 −ϵ2
2 . Consequently,
the derivative of the Lyapunov function satisﬁes:
˙V ≤−α1∥˜x1∥2 −α2∥˜x2∥2 + 1
2ϵ2
∥˜d∥2 + ˜dT ˙˜d
(11)
By referring to (19) and (20), ∥˜d(t)∥→0 and ∥˙˜d(t)∥→0
for t > t1 with t1 is so small that θ is large. Therefore, when
chosen K1 and K2 in the manner that α1 > 0 and α2 > 0,
one can ensure ˙V < 0 and the tracking error ˜x1, ˜x2 converge
asymptotically to zero.
⊓⊔
Author contributions
Methodology was performed by Salim Hadj
Said; software by Ahlem Nasr and Salim Hadj Said; validation by
Taouﬁk Ladhari and Sahbi Boubaker; formal analysis by Ahlem Nasr
and Sahbi Boubaker; investigation by Ahlem Nasr, Taouﬁk Ladhari and
Salim Hadj Said; writing—original draft preparation—by Ahlem Nasr
and Taouﬁk Ladhari; writing—review and editing—by Salim Hadj Said
and Sahbi Boubaker; project administration by Salim Hadj Said. All
authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding Not Applicable.
Data availability No datasets were generated or analyzed during the
current study.
Code availability The code used in this study is available from the
corresponding author upon reasonable request.
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
123

## Page 13

Disturbance observer-based fault-tolerant control of a quadrotor...
Page 13 of 13
  113 
References
1. Federal Aviation Administration: Drones by the Numbers (as
of 4/1/2025). https://www.faa.gov/node/54496. Accessed 1 April
2025
2. Ke C, Cai K-Y, Quan Q (2023) Uniform fault-tolerant control
of a quadcopter with rotor failure. IEEE/ASME Trans Mechatron
28(1):507–517. https://doi.org/10.1109/TMECH.2022.3202804
3. Ke C, Cai K-Y, Quan Q (2023) Uniform passive fault-tolerant con-
trol of a quadcopter with one, two, or three rotor failure. IEEE
Trans Rob 39(6):4297–4311. https://doi.org/10.1109/TRO.2023.
3297048
4. Sun S, Wang X, Chu Q, Visser C (2021) Incremental nonlinear
fault-tolerant control of a quadrotor with complete loss of two
opposing rotors. IEEE Trans Rob 37(1):116–130. https://doi.org/
10.1109/TRO.2020.3010626
5. Sun Z, Zhang F, Lang S (2022) Fault-tolerant model predictive
control of a quadrotor with an unknown complete rotor failure. In:
41st Chinese Control Conference (CCC), pp. 4087–4093
6. Gu
X,
Tian
Y
(2023)
Safety
control
for
the
quadro-
tor unmanned aerial vehicle despite complete loss of one
rotor. IEEE Access 11:124624–124633. https://doi.org/10.1109/
ACCESS.2023.3330230
7. Nan F, Sun S, Foehn P, Scaramuzza D (2022) Nonlinear mpc
for quadrotor fault-tolerant control. IEEE Robot Autom Lett
7(2):5047–5054. https://doi.org/10.1109/LRA.2022.3154033
8. Chung W, Son H (2020) Fault-tolerant control of multiro-
tor uavs by control variable elimination. IEEE/ASME Trans
Mechatron 25(5):2513–2522. https://doi.org/10.1109/TMECH.
2020.2982436
9. Cheng W, Li H, Hou Z (2024) Fault-tolerant control for uav based
on deep reinforcement learning under single rotor failure. In: 36th
ChineseControlandDecisionConference(CCDC),pp.5279–5285
10. Liu X, Yuan Z, Gao Z, Zhang W (2024) Reinforcement learning-
based fault-tolerant control for quadrotor uavs under actuator fault.
IEEE Trans Industr Inf 20(12):13926–13935. https://doi.org/10.
1109/TII.2024.3438241
11. Alkhoori F, Zweiri Y, Younes AB, Taha T, Seneviratne L (2017)
Fault tolerance control for quad-rotor uav using gain-scheduling
in matlab/gazebo. In: 4th International conference on systems and
informatics (ICSAI), pp. 104–109
12. Freddi A, Lanzon A, Longhi S (2011) A feedback lineariza-
tion approach to fault tolerance in quadrotor vehicles. IFAC
Proc Vol 44(1):5413–5418. https://doi.org/10.3182/20110828-6-
IT-1002.02016
13. Liao F, Zhao Z, Wang J (2023) Fault tolerant control of hexarotor
uavs against motor failure. In: 31st Mediterranean conference on
control and automation (MED), pp. 221–226
14. Jung W, Bang H (2021) Fault and failure tolerant model predictive
control of quadrotor uav. Int J Aeronaut Space Sci 22(3):663–675.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s42405-020-00331-1
15. Lian J, Gandhi N, Wang Y, Phan LTX (2024) Online rotor fault
detection and isolation for vertical takeoff and landing vehicles.
In: IEEE/RSJ International conference on intelligent robots and
systems (IROS), pp. 8111–8118
16. Ashe AK. Goli S, Kandath H, Gangadharan D (2023) Multivari-
ate data analysis for motor failure detection and isolation in a
multicopter uav using real-ﬂight attitude signals. In: International
conference on unmanned aircraft systems (ICUAS), pp. 9–16
17. Cacace J, Scognamiglio V, Ruggiero F, Lippiello V (2024) Motor
fault detection and isolation for multi-rotor uavs based on external
wrenchestimationandrecurrentdeepneuralnetwork.JIntellRobot
Syst 110(4):148. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10846-024-02176-2
18. Scognamiglio V, Cacace J, Ruggiero F, Lippiello V (2024) Fault
detection and isolation for a standard quadrotor using a deep neural
network trained on a momentum-based estimator. In: IEEE 20th
International conference on automation science and engineering
(CASE), pp. 730–735
19. Gu X, Zhou E (2024) Fault tolerance controller design for
the safety ﬂight of the quadcopter: theory and implementa-
tion. IEEE Access 12:130053–130062. https://doi.org/10.1109/
ACCESS.2024.3421661
20. Song J, Shang W, Ai S, Zhao K (2022) Model and data-driven com-
bination: a fault diagnosis and localization method for unknown
faultsizeofquadrotoruavactuatorbasedonextendedstateobserver
and deep forest. Sensors 22(19):7355. https://doi.org/10.3390/
s22197355
21. Gao J, Zhang Q, Chen J (2020) Ekf-based actuator fault detec-
tion and diagnosis method for tilt-rotor unmanned aerial vehicles.
Math Probl Eng 2020(1):8019017. https://doi.org/10.1155/2020/
8019017
22. Ahmed N, Alrasheedi N (2025) Commanded ﬁlter-based robust
model reference adaptive control for quadrotor uav with state esti-
mation subject to disturbances. Drones 9(3):181. https://doi.org/
10.3390/drones9030181
23. Ke C, Cai K, Quan Q (2024) Analysis of a uniform passive fault-
tolerant control method for multicopters. J Syst Eng Electron
35(6):1574–1582
24. Quan Q (2017) Introduction to multicopter design and control.
Springer, Singapore
25. Izadi M, Faieghi R (2024) High-gain disturbance observer for
robust trajectory tracking of quadrotors. Control Eng Pract
145:105854. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conengprac.2024.105854
Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds
exclusive rights to this article under a publishing agreement with the
author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted
manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of such
publishing agreement and applicable law.
123
