# s41598-026-38931-8.pdf

## Page 1

ESO based adaptive neural 
network control for a quadrotor 
against wind and payload 
disturbances
Xin Cai1, Jie Dai2, Fan Liu2 & Ping Ye3
This paper investigates the design of a robust controller for the trajectory tracking issue of an 
underactuated quadrotor unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) subject to multiple disturbances. An anti-
disturbance control framework is proposed by utilizing extended state observer (ESO) and neural 
network technology. Firstly, the dynamic model of the quadrotor UAV under wind and payload 
disturbance is established. To actively estimate the lumped disturbance of the UAV system, an ESO 
with only one parameter is introduced and the disturbances are transformed into the extended state 
of the UAV system for estimation. Secondly, an adaptive tracking controller that does not accurately 
obtain the dynamic model knowledge is constructed based on neural network method, where 
weights of the network can be automatically adjusted by the developed adaptive law. Then, finite-
time convergency is analyzed for the ESO with only one parameter, and the Lyapunov criterion is 
adopted to verify the uniform ultimate boundedness of the UAV closed-loop system. Finally, various 
simulations under different scenarios are carried out to demonstrate the superiority and effectiveness 
of the proposed control strategy. For comparison, linear active disturbance rejection control (LADRC), 
sliding mode control (SMC), model-free based terminal SMC (MFTSMC), and adaptive fractional-order 
control (ADFOC) algorithms are introduced. Moreover, the physical experiment is given to validate the 
practicability of the proposed method.
Keywords  quadrotor UAV, multiple disturbances, extended state observer, neural network, Lyapunov 
criterion
In the past few years, quadrotors have been widely applied in various fields, such as telecommunication relay, 
surveillance, and agriculture1–4. The quadrotor UAV itself has nonlinear, strong coupling, and underactuated 
characteristics, and it is easily affected by external wind disturbances and payload disturbances during flight5,6. 
Therefore, how to develop the high-precision tracking controller for quadrotor is a challenging issue, especially 
in the case of multiple disturbances.
A number of researchers have proposed many control schemes for the quadrotor. Proportional integral 
derivative (PID) strategy has been used to design UAV control framework as a classic method7–9. However, 
PID is sensitive to disturbances and its parameter tuning process is complex. In10, a nonsingular terminal 
sliding mode control (SMC) scheme was constructed based on finite time technology. Wang et al.11 developed 
a backstepping control scheme for the quadrotor with model uncertainty and external disturbance. In order to 
simultaneously address the unknown disturbance and control input constraints in the UAV system, Alsaade et 
al.12 designed a trajectory tracking control strategy using H∞ technology. An adaptive fractional-order SMC 
framework was proposed to achieve fast speed and high accuracy performance for the UAV in13. In addition, 
there exist many other methods, such as prescribed performance control14,15, fixed-time control16,17, predefined-
time control18,event-triggered control19,20,fuzzy control21. However, the above methods rely too much on 
accurate mathematical models of UAV. If the mathematical model of UAV is not accurate enough or the UAV is 
subject to external unknown disturbances during flight, the above control methods cannot guarantee the flight 
performance of the UAV.
1School of Electrical Engineering, Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu 610031, China. 2CRCC High-tech 
Equipment Corporation Limited, Kunming 650215, China. 3Key Laboratory of Smart Manufacturing in Energy 
Chemical Process, Ministry of Education, East China University of Science and Technology, Shanghai 200237, China. 
email: caixin94@outlook.com
OPEN
Scientific Reports |         (2026) 16:7758 
1
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-026-38931-8
www.nature.com/scientificreports

## Page 2

Many learning based methods have also been applied to UAV control, which have low model dependence 
and better adaptive capabilities. They can intelligently process uncertain information and are suitable for solving 
control problems in high complexity systems. Gao et al.22 adopted neural network to approximate the nonlinear 
terms in the system model for UAV fault-tolerant control. Shen and Xu23 estimated unknown disturbances in 
the quadrotor UAV system using function approximation ability of radial basis function (RBF) neural network. 
Other neural network algorithms were investigated in24,25. Reinforcement learning methods for UAV were 
studied in26,27. In28, reinforcement learning and backstepping technology were combined to study the optimized 
tracking control scheme of the quadrotor UAV system. However, learning based methods require a significant 
amount of computation. The onboard CPU is limited in computation and does not have the ability of real-
time control. In addition, it is difficult to analyze the stability and reliability of the system through theoretical 
methods.
According to the disadvantages and advantages of the above methods, a novel active disturbance rejection 
control (ADRC) strategy was proposed by Han29. This method combines the advantages of modern control 
theory and PID controller, with strong anti-disturbance ability and fast response speed. Extended state observer 
(ESO) is the core part of ADRC, which considers external and internal disturbances of the system as total 
disturbances and expands them into new state variables for estimation and compensation. At present, ESO has 
been adopted in the industry, such as electric power system and Texas Instruments30–32. However, how to apply 
it to practical quadrotor UAV system and complete the effective combination of control theory and practical 
engineering is still worth further research.
Inspired by the above analysis, model based control methods rely on accurate mathematical models of UAV. 
If the mathematical model is not precise enough, the control performance will be greatly affected. Based on 
learning methods, although they do not rely on complex mathematical models, they require a large amount 
of computation and are difficult to implement in engineering. This paper aims to construct the UAV flight 
controller with superior control performance and engineering applications by combining the advantages of 
model algorithms and learning methods. This paper employs ESO and neural network techniques to study the 
trajectory tracking problem of UAV under wind and payload disturbances, the main contributions of this paper 
are summarized as follows.
•	 Different from various forms of ESO have been previously proposed, such as classical nonlinear ESO and 
adaptive ESO33, an ESO with only one parameter is constructed for the UAV system to estimate and compen­
sate for lumped disturbance composed of wind and payload disturbances. It only requires fewer parameters 
to be designed, greatly improving debugging efficiency. Furthermore, it is proved that the estimation error of 
the observer can converge to 0.
•	 Compared with the results based on accurate UAV model in11,16, this paper constructs the adaptive neural 
network position controller that does not rely on the system model is developed. Based on the Lyapunov 
method, the adaptive law of the neural network weights is derived, and a rigorous stability proof is given, 
which proves that the position tracking error of the whole UAV closed-loop system is uniformly ultimately 
bounded (UUB).
•	 Compared with the results in18,20, the effectiveness of the proposed control strategy are only verified through 
numerical simulation. Furthermore, this paper conducts UAV anti-disturbacne flight experiments by build­
ing a physical experimental platform, and the combination of theory and practical application is completed.
The layout of this paper are as follows. In Section 2, the dynamic model of the UAV is established and problem 
formulation is given. Section 3 presents controller design. Section 4 provides numerical simulation and actual 
flight results. Section 5 concludes this paper.
Problem formulation
The structural framework of quadrotor UAV is depicted in Fig. 1. The thrust required for the quadrotor is 
generated by four motors driving propellers. Let Oe and Ob be the world coordinate system and the body 
coordinate system, respectively. Denote x, y and z as the positions of UAV in 3D space. ϕ, θ, ψ are roll, pitch, and 
yaw angles. From34,35, the dynamic model of UAV is constructed as
	













































¨ϕ(t) = ˙θ(t) ˙ψ(t)
(Iy −Iz
Ix
)
+ l
Ix u2(t)
¨θ(t) = ˙ϕ(t) ˙ψ(t)
(
Iz −Ix
Iy
)
+ l
Iy u3(t)
¨ψ(t) = ˙ϕ(t) ˙θ(t)
(Ix −Iy
Iz
)
+ 1
Iz u4(t)
¨x(t) = 1
m[(cos ϕ(t) cos ψ(t) sin θ(t)
+ sin ϕ(t) sin ψ(t))u1(t) + dw1(t) + dq1]
¨y(t) = 1
m[(cos ϕ(t) sin θ(t) sin ψ(t)
−cos ψ(t) sin ϕ(t))u1(t) + dw2(t) + dq2]
¨z(t) = 1
m [(cos θ(t) cos ϕ(t))u1(t) −g + dw3(t) + dq3]

(1)
Scientific Reports |         (2026) 16:7758 
2
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-026-38931-8
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

## Page 3

where m, g are the mass and gravitational acceleration of the UAV. Ix, Iy and Iz denote the moment of inertia 
of the UAV. l is the distance from the center of the aircraft body to the rotor axis. u1(t), u2(t), u3(t), u4(t) are 
control thrust provided by four motors. dwi(t), dqi(t)(i = 1, 2, 3) refer to time-varying wind disturbances and 
cable suspended payload disturbance. It is worth noting that we focus on the position control of UAV in this 
paper, and it is assumed that the attitude system of UAV is not affected by multiple disturbances.
The control goal of the this paper is to develop a control strategy for the quadrotor UAV under wind and the 
cable-suspended payload disturbances to ensure that {x, y, z} can track expected trajectory {xd, yd, zd}, and 
the tracking errors are bounded.
Controller design and stability analysis
In this section, an adaptive neural network control strategy is designed based on ESO. Figure 2 depicts the 
structure diagram of the control scheme, and the stability of proposed control algorithm is analyzed using the 
Lyapunov function.
Design of the ESO
This paper considers two types of disturbance imposed on a quadrotor UAV. One is the external time-varying 
wind disturbance expressed by dw. The other is cable suspended payload disturbance, that is, dq. It is assumed 
that ˙dw and ˙dq are bounded, i.e., 
 ˙dw
 ⩽¯dw,
 ˙dq
 ⩽¯dq, where ¯dw and ¯dq are known constants. Therefore, the 
lumped disturbance df can be expressed as:
	
df = dw + dq
(2)
Let X1 = [x, y, z]T , X2 = [ ˙x, ˙y, ˙z]T , X3 = [df1, df2, df3]T , then the position dynamics model of the UAV 
(1) is rewritten as
Fig. 2.  Structure of the proposed trajectory tracking control strategy.
 
Fig. 1.  The quadrotor and the cable suspended payload in wind environment.
 
Scientific Reports |         (2026) 16:7758 
3
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-026-38931-8
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

## Page 4

{
˙X1 = X2
˙X2 = X3 + G(x)u
˙X3 = ˙df

(3)
where u = [ux, uy, uz]T , G(x) is related to the system dynamics model.
Define Z1, Z2 and Z3 as the estimated values of X1, X2 and df. For the system (3) , the ESO is constructed 
as
	
{
˙Z1 = Z2 + β1 (X1 −Z1)
˙Z2 = Z3 + β2 (X1 −Z1) + G(x)u
˙Z3 = β3 (X1 −Z1)

(4)
where β1, β2, and β3 are the observer parameters. Furthermore, according to (3) and (4), the estimation error 
equation is obtained as
	





˙E1 = −β1E1 + E2
˙E2 = −β2E1 + E3
˙E3 = −β3E1 + ˙df

(5)
where Ei(t) = Xi(t) −Zi(t), i = 1, 2, 3. Denote ξi(t) = Ei(t)/ωi−1
o
, i = 1, 2, 3, the Eq. (5) is rewritten
	





˙ξ1(t) = −β1
ω0o ξ1 + ωoξ2
˙ξ2(t) = −β2
ω1o ξ1 + ωoξ3
˙ξ3(t) = −β3
ω2o ξ1 +
˙df
ω2o

(6)
Choose β1 = 3ωo, β2 = 3ω2
o, β3 = ω3
o, the Eq. (6) is rewritten as
	
˙ξ(t) = ωoAξ(t) + B
˙df
ω2o

(7)
where A =
[
−3
1
0
−3
0
1
−3
0
0
]
, B =
[
0
0
1
]
.
Theorem 1  It is assumed that ˙df is bounded, then there exists the finite time T > 0 and the positive constant 
κi,such that |Ei(t)| ≤κi, i = 1, 2, 3, ∀t ≥T > 0.
Proof  From the Eq. (7) , it can get
	
ξ(t) = eωoAtξ(0) +
ˆ t
0
eωoA(t−τ)B
˙df
ω2o dτ
(8)
Define Q(t) =
´ t
0 eωoA(t−τ)B
˙df
ω2o dτ. Since ˙df is bounded, namely 
 ˙df
 ⩽¯D, ¯D > 0, it has
	
|Qi(t)| ≤
¯D
ω3o

A−1B
i
 +

A−1eωoAtB
i

(9)
From A−1 =
[
0
0
−1
1
0
−3
0
1
−3
]
, it gets
	

A−1B
i
 =
 1,
i = 1
3,
i = 2, 3 
(10)
Since A is a Hurwitz matrix, there exists a finite time T > 0, for all t ≥T, i, j = 1, 2, 3, such that
	
 

eωoAt
ij
 ≤
1
ω3o

eωoAtB
i
 ≤
1
ω3o

(11)
Since T is related to ωoA36, then set
Scientific Reports |         (2026) 16:7758 
4
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-026-38931-8
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

## Page 5

A−1 =
[
m11
m12
m13
m21
m22
m23
m31
m32
m33
]
eωoAt =
[
n11
n12
n13
n21
n22
n23
n31
n32
n33
]
For all t ≥T, it has
	

A−1eωoAtB
i
 = |mi1n13 + mi2n23 + mi3n33|
≤

1
ω3o ,
i = 1
4
ω3o ,
i = 2, 3

(12)
Combine equations (9), (10) and (12), it has
	
|Qi(t)| ≤3 ¯D
ω3o + 4 ¯D
ω6o

(13)
Denote ξmax(0) = |ξ1(0)| + |ξ2(0)| + |ξ3(0)|, for all t ≥T, i = 1, 2, 3, it gets
	

eωoAtξ(0)
i
 ≤ξmax(0)
ω3o

(14)
then
	
|ξi(t)| ≤ξmax(0)
ω3o
+ 3 ¯D
ω3o + 4 ¯D
ω6o

(15)
Define Emax(0) = |E1(0)| + |E2(0)| + |E3(0)|, from ξi(t) = Ei(t)/ωi−1
o
 and (13), (14), (15), it obtains
	
|Ei(t)| ≤Emax(0)
ω3o
+ 3 ¯D
ω4−i
o
+ 4 ¯D
ω7−i
o
= κi
(16)
From (16) and ¯D is a positive constant, by adjusting the bandwidth ωo of observer, it gets |Ei(t)| −→0. Finally, 
the estimation errors are convergent. Hence, the proof of Theorem 1 is finished.□
Design of adaptive neural network controller
An adaptive neural network controller for quadrotor is developed utilizing the disturbance estimation values of 
ESO. For the system (3), the output error of the system is
	
{ q = Xd −X1
˙q = ˙Xd −X2 
(17)
where Xd = [xd, yd, zd]T  represents the expected trajectory. Furthermore, taking the X-axis channel as an 
example, the controller design for other channels is similar to it, and the ideal UAV tracking control protocol is 
constructed as
	
u∗
x =
1
G(x)1
(
df1 + ¨xd + KT Q)

(18)
where Q = [xd −x, ˙xd −˙x]T , K = [kp, kd]T . Furthermore, the roots of s2 + kds + kP = 0 can be placed in 
the left half complex plane by designing K. Then, ˙q(t) →0, q(t) →0, when t →∞.
Based on the ESO designed above, disturbance estimation Z3 can be obtained, while G(x) is associated with 
model parameters, and it is difficult to acquire its accurate value. As shown in Fig. 2, the RBF neural network is 
a classic feedforward neural network that can approximate any nonlinear function by reasonably determining 
parameters in the network. Therefore, RBF neural network is designed to estimate G(x) through adaptive 
learning methods. The output of the neural network is
	
ˆG(x) = ˆ
W T h(x)
(19)
where ˆ
W represents weight of the network, x = [q, ˙q]T  is the input vector, h is the excitation function of the 
hidden layer expressed as
	
hj = exp
(
−∥x −cj∥2
2b2
j
)
j = 1, . . . , 5
(20)
Scientific Reports |         (2026) 16:7758 
5
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-026-38931-8
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

## Page 6

where b represents the width of Gaussian function, c is center of the function. Finally, the tracking controller 
based on ESO is constructed as
	
ux =
1
ˆG(x)1
(
−Z3,x + ¨xd + KT Q)

(21)
It is worth noting that the ESO based adaptive neural network controller only utilizes the expected tracking 
signal and output information of the system, and the controller does not depend on the system model. In 
addition, by utilizing the second-order derivative of the expected tracking signal, the controller parameters 
can be strictly selected according to pole placement method, which is conducive to fast tracking of high-speed 
maneuverable objects.
Theorem 2  Consider the UAV system described by (3), if the ESO (4) is adopted and the adaptive law of weights 
in RBF neural network is constructed as
	
˙ˆ
W = −γQT ΞΘh(x)
1
ˆG(x)
(
−Z3 + ¨
Xd + KT Q)

(22)
where γ > 0, Ξ is a positive definite matrix. Then, the system is asymptotically stable under the proposed 
controller (21).
Proof  From Eqs. (3) and (21), it has
	
¨q = −KT Q −E3 + ( ˆG(x) −G(x))u∗
(23)
Denote
	
ϱ =
[
0
1
−kp
−kd
]
, Θ =
[ 0
1
]
Then, (23) can be rewritten as
	
˙Q = ϱQ + Θ (
( ˆG(x) −G(x))u∗−E3
)

(24)
The optimal weight value is selected as
	
W ∗= arg min
W ∈Ω2[sup | ˆG(x) −G(x)|]
(25)
It can find such an optimal value that can ensure the stability of the entire system, and the specific details can be 
found in37. The network approximation error is expressed as
	
ε = ˆG (x | W ∗) −G(x)
(26)
Then, (24) is rewritten as
	
˙Q = ϱQ + Θ
((( ˆ
W −W ∗)T h(x) + ε
)
u∗−E3
)

(27)
The Lyapunov function is selected as
	
V2 = 1
2QT ΞQ + 1
2γ
( ˆ
W −W ∗)T ( ˆ
W −W ∗)

(28)
where Ξ satisfies the following equation
	
ϱT Ξ + Ξϱ = −ϑ
(29)
where 
ϑ > 0. 
Then, 
let 
M = Θ
((( ˆ
W −W ∗)T h(x) + ε
)
u∗−E3
)
, V3 = 1
2QT ΞQ 
and 
V4 =
1
2γ
( ˆ
W −W ∗)T ( ˆ
W −W ∗)
, it gets
	
˙V3 = 1
2
˙QT ΞQ + 1
2QT Ξ ˙Q
= 1
2
(
QT ϱT + M T)
ΞQ + 1
2QT Ξ(ϱQ + M)
= 1
2QT (
ϱT Ξ + Ξϱ)
Q + 1
2M T ΞQ + 1
2QT ΞM
Scientific Reports |         (2026) 16:7758 
6
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-026-38931-8
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

## Page 7

= −1
2QT ϑQ + 1
2
(
M T ΞQ + QT ΞM)
= −1
2QT ϑQ + QT ΞM

(30)
Substitute M into (30) yields
	
˙V3 = −1
2QT ϑQ + QT ΞΘ ( ˆ
W −W ∗)T h(x)u∗+ QT ΞΘεu∗
= −1
2QT ϑQ + ( ˆ
W −W ∗)T QΞΘh(x)u∗
+ QT ΞΘεu∗−QT ΞΘE3

(31)
Take the derivative of V4, it gets
	
˙V4 = 1
2γ
˙ˆ
W T ( ˆ
W −W ∗)
+ 1
2γ
( ˆ
W −W ∗)T ˙ˆ
W
= 1
γ
( ˆ
W −W ∗)T ˙ˆ
W
= 1
γ
( ˆ
W −W ∗)T ˙ˆ
W

(32)
From Theorem 1, the gain of the observer can be adjusted so that E3 →0, then it gets
	
˙V2 = ˙V3 + ˙V4
= −1
2QT ϑQ + QT ΞΘεu∗
+ 1
γ
( ˆ
W −W ∗)T ( ˙W + γQT ΞΘh(x)u∗)

(33)
Furthermore, by combining (22), the following equation is derived
	
˙V2 = −1
2QT ϑQ + QT ΞΘεu∗
= −1
2QT ϑQ + εQT ΞΘ
ˆG(x)
(
−Z3 + ¨
Xd + KT Q)
(34)
According to −1
2QT ϑQ ≤0, By adjusting the neural network parameters such that ε →0, ˙V2 ≤0 can be 
obtained. Therefore, the system is stable in the Lyapunov sense. The proof of Theorem 2 is finished.□
Numerical and experimental results
Numerical results
To verify the effectiveness and superiority of the designed algorithm, simulation experiments are carried out in 
MATLAB/Simulink. The physical parameters of the UAV are shown in Table 1. The control parameters are selected 
as β1 = 60, β2 = 1200, β3 = 8000, kp = 5, kd = 8, c = [−1, −0.5, 0, 0.5, 1], b = 3, γ = 1000. The RBFNN 
takes five nodes, two inputs, and one output. The initial states of the UAV are set to X1 = [x, y, z]T = [0, 0, 0]T .
Case 1. The expected spiral time-varying tracking trajectory is
	
{
xd = 5 sin(t/3)
yd = −5 sin(t/3) cos(t/3)
zd = 0.7t

(35)
In the simulation, three other existing methods are used for comparative experiments, one is the linear active 
disturbance rejection control (LADRC) algorithm in38, the other is the classical sliding mode control (SMC) 
method, and the other is model-free based terminal SMC (MFTSMC) algorithm in39. In the simulation process, 
there exists no external disturbance between 0 and 20 s. As shown in Fig. 3, after t=20s, white noise dwi(i = 1, 2, 3) 
Parameter
Value
Parameter
Value
m
1.2kg
Ix
1.7 × 10−2 kg · m2
g
9.8m · s2
Iy
1.7 × 10−2 kg · m2
l
0.16m
Iz
2.8 × 10−2 kg · m2
Table 1.  The parameter value.
 
Scientific Reports |         (2026) 16:7758 
7
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-026-38931-8
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

## Page 8

with a peak value of 5 is added to simulate wind disturbances with random direction and speed, and 
dq1 = −1.6 sin (0.1t) + 0.8 sin (0.44t)m/s2, dq2 = 1.5 sin (0.4t) + 1.5 cos (0.7t)m/s2, dq3 = cos (0.7t)m/s2 
are added to simulate payload disturbances with periodic characteristics.
Figures 4 and 5 show the trajectory tracking results. Figure 6 gives the control signal curve. It can be seen 
that the four control algorithms can generally enable the UAV track the desired reference trajectory. Due to the 
existence of multiple disturbances (composed of wind disturbances and payload disturbances), the other three 
control methods can only rely on their own robustness for passive disturbance rejection, resulting in relatively 
poor steady-state performance. However, this paper uses the ESO to estimate disturbances, thereby performing 
feedforward compensation at control law to achieve active disturbance rejection. In addition, it combines 
adaptive neural network method to form composite disturbance rejection, which improves the robustness of 
the system. Then, the control performance of four algorithms is quantitatively analyzed. Table 2 shows the Root 
Fig. 4.  The response of trajectory tracking (Case 1).
 
0
10
20
30
40
50
-5
0
5
0
10
20
30
40
50
-5
0
5
0
10
20
30
40
50
Time(s)
-5
0
5
0
10
20
30
40
50
-4
-2
0
2
4
0
10
20
30
40
50
-4
-2
0
2
4
0
10
20
30
40
50
Time(s)
-2
0
2
Fig. 3.  wind disturbances dw and payload disturbances dq (Case 1).
 
Scientific Reports |         (2026) 16:7758 
8
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-026-38931-8
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

## Page 9

Mean Square Error (RMSE) of four control methods, from which it can be seen that designed control algorithm 
has better tracking effect than the other three.
Case 
2. 
The 
cylindrical 
spiral 
reference 
trajectory 
is 
denoted 
as: 
xd = 5 sin(t/3); 
yd = 5 cos(t/3); zd = 0.8t.The UAV is subjected to random wind and load disturbances after t = 25 s. As shown 
in Fig. 7, external wind disturbance is simulated using white noise dwi(i = 1, 2, 3) with a peak value of 5. dq1 
X
Y
Z
Proposed
0.23
0.212
0.0358
LADRC
0.51
0.59
0.116
MFTSMC
0.66
0.72
0.131
SMC
0.48
0.56
0.127
Table 2.  RMSE tracking errors(Case 1).
 
Fig. 6.  Control torques (Case 1).
 
Fig. 5.  Response of trajectory tracking control (Case 1).
 
Scientific Reports |         (2026) 16:7758 
9
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-026-38931-8
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

## Page 10

= −1.5 sin(0.2t) + 0.7 cos(0.6t)m/s2, dq2 =   2 sin(t)m/s2, dq3 =    2 cos(0.3t)m/s2 are is used to simulate 
payload disturbances.
Figures 8 and 9 give the trajectory tracking results. Figure 10 shows the control signal curve. Table 3 gives 
the RMSE of several control strategies. From the above results, it can be seen that the proposed method has the 
0
10
20
30
40
50
-5
0
5
0
10
20
30
40
50
-5
0
5
0
10
20
30
40
50
Time(s)
-5
0
5
0
10
20
30
40
50
-2
0
2
0
10
20
30
40
50
-2
0
2
0
10
20
30
40
50
Time(s)
-2
0
2
Fig. 7.  wind disturbances dw and payload disturbances dq (Case 2).
 
Fig. 8.  The response of trajectory tracking (Case 2).
 
Scientific Reports |         (2026) 16:7758 
10
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-026-38931-8
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

## Page 11

better tracking performance and can track time-varying trajectory under multiple disturbances composed of 
wind and payload.
Compared to fixed points, the cylindrical spiral reference trajectory is relatively more difficult for the 
quadrotor UAV to track. From the Fig. 9, it can be seen that although the UAV is subject to random wind and 
payload disturbances during flight, the trajectory curve of the UAV is relatively smooth and the fluctuations 
are small under the proposed control scheme, and the flight trajectory curves of the UAV under the other 
three methods have significant fluctuations. The active disturbance rejection control scheme proposed in this 
paper utilizes ESO to estimate and compensate for disturbances, while the other three methods use their own 
robustness for passive disturbance rejection control with a certain time lag.
X
Y
Z
Proposed
0.21
0.25
0.0268
LADRC
0.46
0.66
0.148
MFTSMC
0.76
0.83
0.132
SMC
0.45
0.61
0.133
Table 3.  RMSE tracking errors(Case 2).
 
Fig. 10.  Control torques (Case 2).
 
Fig. 9.  Response of trajectory tracking control (Case 2).
 
Scientific Reports |         (2026) 16:7758 
11
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-026-38931-8
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

## Page 12

Fig. 12.  Response of trajectory tracking control(Case 3).
 
Fig. 11.  The response of trajectory tracking(Case 3).
 
Scientific Reports |         (2026) 16:7758 
12
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-026-38931-8
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

## Page 13

Case 3. On the basis of Case2, the initial states of the UAV are reset to X1 = [x, y, z]T = [1, 1, 1]T , and the 
adaptive fractional-order control (ADFOC) algorithm in40 is added for comparative experiments. Figures 11 and 
12 give the trajectory tracking results. Figure 13 shows the attitude tracking curve. It can be seen that even if the 
initial state of the UAV changes, the UAV subjected to multiple disturbances can still quickly track the desired 
trajectory and achieve better control performance.
Experimental results
This section conducts flight experiments on UAV under wind and payload disturbances. Figure 14 shows the 
experimental platform for the flight test. The motion capture system can acquire position information of UAV 
in real time,
industrial fan is used to apply wind disturbance to the UAV, and a 200g water bottle is suspended under the 
quadrotor body as payload disturbance. The expected trajectory of the UAV is set to Xd = [xd, yd, zd]T = [0, 0, 1]T . 
Figure 15 shows the experimental process. The UAV suffers wind disturbance and payload disturbance during 
the whole flight process, and the wind speed is sustained at 4m/s according to the anemometer. Figure 16 shows 
the tracking results with the average tracking errors in XYZ directions are 0.04m, 0.06 and 0.02m. The tracking 
error values are relatively small, and the UAV can still achieve better tracking performance even when subjected 
to wind and payload disturbances simultaneously. The overall trajectory curves are relatively stable without 
Fig. 14.  Experimental testbed.
 
Fig. 13.  Attitude tracking performances (Case 3).
 
Scientific Reports |         (2026) 16:7758 
13
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-026-38931-8
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

## Page 14

significant fluctuations, indicating the effectiveness of the designed method. The control signal curves in Fig. 
17 exhibit a slight high-frequency oscillation and are generally stable, which is acceptable and executable for 
practical actuators.
Before the UAV takes off, two industrial fans blow air onto the UAV. In addition, due to a water bottle hanging 
below the UAV body, the UAV is simultaneously affected by external wind and payload disturbances. The UAV 
continuously climbs up to the desired height, and then manually adjusts the payload suspended below the body 
to apply random unknown disturbances to the UAV. The observer designed in this paper estimates multiple 
disturbances and compensates for the estimated values in the controller. From the Fig. 16, it can be seen that the 
flight trajectory curve of the UAV is relatively smooth and does not show significant fluctuations,indicating that 
the anti-disturbance control framework proposed has the better practical effects.
Fig. 16.  Trajectory tracking performances.
 
Fig. 15.  Experimental process.
 
Scientific Reports |         (2026) 16:7758 
14
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-026-38931-8
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

## Page 15

Conclusion
This paper investigates the trajectory tracking issue of UAV under multiple disturbances composed of wind 
and payload disturbances. A composite anti-disturbance control framework is designed using ESO and neural 
network, and the stability of system is analyzed utilizing Lyapunov method. The superiority of the developed 
control strategy is verified by numerical simulation and actual flight test, and the effective combination of theory 
and engineering is completed. In future work, it can be extended to multi-UAV cooperative control system. 
Alternatively, the fault-tolerant control in the case of actuator fault is further studied.
Data availability
The datasets generated during and/or analysed during the current study are available from the corresponding 
author on reasonable request.
Received: 14 November 2025; Accepted: 2 February 2026
References
	 1.	 Sunwen, D., Yanwei, C. & Guorui, F. Road detection in open-pit mining areas using d-dmcatnet network based on uav images. 
IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett.22, 1–5 (2025).
	 2.	 Mao, K. et al. A survey on channel sounding technologies and measurements for uav-assisted communications. IEEE Trans. 
Instrum. Meas.73, 1–24 (2024).
	 3.	 Gao, Y. et al. Uav-assisted mec system with mobile ground terminals: Drl-based joint terminal scheduling and uav 3d trajectory 
design. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol.73(7), 10164–10180 (2024).
	 4.	 Aela, P., Chi, H.-L., Fares, A., Zayed, T. & Kim, M. Uav-based studies in railway infrastructure monitoring. Autom. Constr.167, 
105714 (2024).
	 5.	 Zuo, Z., Liu, C., Han, Q.-L. & Song, J. Unmanned aerial vehicles: Control methods and future challenges. IEEE/CAA J. Autom. 
Sin.9(4), 601–614 (2022).
	 6.	 Cai, X., Zhu, X. & Yao, W. Fixed-time trajectory tracking control of a quadrotor uav under time-varying wind disturbances: theory 
and experimental validation. Meas. Sci. Technol.35(8), 086205 (2024).
	 7.	 Lopez-Sanchez, I. & Moreno-Valenzuela, J. PID control of quadrotor UAVs: A survey. Ann. Rev. Control56, 100900 (2023).
	 8.	 Yan, L. et al. Distributed optimization of heterogeneous UAV cluster PID controller based on machine learning. Comput. Electr. 
Eng.101, 108059 (2022).
	 9.	 Sanguino, T. D. J. M. & Domínguez, J. M. L. Design and stabilization of a coandă effect-based uav: Comparative study between 
fuzzy logic and pid control approaches. Robot. Auton. Syst.175, 104662 (2024).
	10.	 Hou, Z., Lu, P. & Tu, Z. Nonsingular terminal sliding mode control for a quadrotor UAV with a total rotor failure. Aerosp. Sci. 
Technol.98, 105716 (2020).
	11.	 Wang, J., Alattas, K. A., Bouteraa, Y., Mofid, O. & Mobayen, S. Adaptive finite-time backstepping control tracker for quadrotor 
UAV with model uncertainty and external disturbance. Aerosp. Sci. Technol.133, 108088 (2023).
	12.	 Alsaade, F. W., Jahanshahi, H., Yao, Q., Al-zahrani, M. S. & Alzahrani, A. S. A new neural network-based optimal mixed H2/H∞ 
control for a modified unmanned aerial vehicle subject to control input constraints. Adv. Space Res.71(9), 3631–3643 (2023).
	13.	 Labbadi, M. & Cherkaoui, M. Adaptive fractional-order nonsingular fast terminal sliding mode based robust tracking control of 
quadrotor uav with gaussian random disturbances and uncertainties. IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst.57(4), 2265–2277 (2021).
	14.	 Shen, Z., Li, F., Cao, X. & Guo, C. Prescribed performance dynamic surface control for trajectory tracking of quadrotor uav with 
uncertainties and input constraints. Int. J. Control94(11), 2945–2955 (2021).
	15.	 Kong, L., Reis, J., He, W. & Silvestre, C. Experimental validation of a robust prescribed performance nonlinear controller for an 
unmanned aerial vehicle with unknown mass. IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron.29(1), 301–312 (2024).
	16.	 Hu, F., Ma, T. & Su, X. Adaptive fuzzy sliding-mode fixed-time control for quadrotor unmanned aerial vehicles with prescribed 
performance. IEEE Trans. Fuzzy Syst.32(7), 4109–4120 (2024).
	17.	 Shao, S., Wang, Z., Xu, S., Zhao, Y. & Wu, X. Fixed-time tracking control for quadrotor uav via a novel disturbance observer. Proc. 
Inst. Mech. Eng. Part G: J. Aerosp. Eng.239(15), 2187–2206 (2025).
Fig. 17.  Time responses of control inputs.
 
Scientific Reports |         (2026) 16:7758 
15
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-026-38931-8
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

## Page 16

18.	 Wang, C., Zhao, W., Lv, S., Shen, H. & Park, J. H. Predefined-time optimized tracking control for quavs with extended state 
observer and global prescribed performance. IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng.22, 19961–19973 (2025).
	19.	 Wang, C., Li, W. & Liang, M. Event-triggered prescribed performance adaptive fuzzy fault-tolerant control for quadrotor uav with 
actuator saturation and failures. IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst.61(1), 813–828 (2025).
	20.	 Wang, C., Yang, N., Zhang, L., Zhang, L. & Liang, M. Event-triggered finite-time trajectory tracking control for quadrotor uav 
subjected to time-varying output constraints. Int. J. Fuzzy Syst.27(3), 791–804 (2025).
	21.	 Shao, X. et al. Efficient path-following for urban logistics: A fuzzy control strategy for consumer uavs under disturbance constraints. 
IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron.71(2), 7117–7128 (2025).
	22.	 Gao, B., Liu, Y.-J. & Liu, L. Adaptive neural fault-tolerant control of a quadrotor UAV via fast terminal sliding mode. Aerosp. Sci. 
Technol.129, 107818 (2022).
	23.	 Shen, S. & Xu, J. Adaptive neural network-based active disturbance rejection flight control of an unmanned helicopter. Aerosp. Sci. 
Technol.119, 107062 (2021).
	24.	 Xiong, J.-J., Wang, X.-Y. & Li, C. Recurrent neural network based sliding mode control for an uncertain tilting quadrotor uav. Int. 
J. Robust Nonlinear Control35(18), 8030–8046 (2025).
	25.	 Xiong, J.-J. & Chen, Y. Rbfnn-based parameter adaptive sliding mode control for an uncertain tquav with time-varying mass. Int. 
J. Robust Nonlinear Control35(11), 4658–4668 (2025).
	26.	 Dinh, G. K., Thi, V. H. N. & Dao, P. N. Model-free optimal formation control strategy for multiple quadrotors. J. Control, Autom. 
Electr. Syst.36(5), 814–824 (2025).
	27.	 Hua, H. & Fang, Y. A novel reinforcement learning-based robust control strategy for a quadrotor. IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron.70(3), 
2812–2821 (2023).
	28.	 Wen, G., Hao, W., Feng, W. & Gao, K. Optimized backstepping tracking control using reinforcement learning for quadrotor 
unmanned aerial vehicle system. IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. Syst.52(8), 5004–5015 (2022).
	29.	 Han, J. From pid to active disturbance rejection control. IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron.56(3), 900–906 (2009).
	30.	 Wu, Z., Li, D., Liu, Y. & Chen, Y. Performance analysis of improved ADRCs for a class of high-order processes with verification on 
main steam pressure control. IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron.70(6), 6180–6190 (2023).
	31.	 Xue, W., Zhang, X., Sun, L. & Fang, H. Extended state filter based disturbance and uncertainty mitigation for nonlinear uncertain 
systems with application to fuel cell temperature control. IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron.67(12), 10682–10692 (2020).
	32.	 Ahmad, S., Abdulraheem, K. K., Tolokonsky, A. O. & Ahmed, H. Active disturbance rejection control of pressurized water reactor. 
Ann. Nuclear Energy189, 109845 (2023).
	33.	 Zhang, X., Zhang, X., Xue, W. & Xin, B. An overview on recent progress of extended state observers for uncertain systems: 
Methods, theory, and applications. Adv. Control Appl. Eng. Ind. Syst.3(2), 89 (2021).
	34.	 Shao, X., Sun, G., Yao, W., Liu, J. & Wu, L. Adaptive sliding mode control for quadrotor UAVs with input saturation. IEEE/ASME 
Trans. Mechatron.27(3), 1498–1509 (2022).
	35.	 Ranjan, S. & Majhi, S. Adaptive neural predefined-time attitude control of an uncertain quadrotor uav with actuator fault. IEEE 
Trans. Circuits Syst. II: Express Briefs71(12), 4939–4943 (2024).
	36.	 Zheng, Q., Dong, L., Lee, D. H. & Gao, Z. Active disturbance rejection control for MEMS gyroscopes. IEEE Trans. Control Syst. 
Technol.17(6), 1432–1438 (2009).
	37.	 Ge, S. S. & Wang, C. Adaptive neural control of uncertain mimo nonlinear systems. IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.15(3), 674–692 
(2004).
	38.	 Cai, Y. et al. Research on path generation and stability control method for UAV-based intelligent spray painting of ships. J. Field 
Robot.39(3), 188–202 (2022).
	39.	 Wang, H., Ye, X., Tian, Y., Zheng, G. & Christov, N. Model-free-based terminal SMC of quadrotor attitude and position. IEEE 
Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst.52(5), 2519–2528 (2016).
	40.	 Mofid, O. & Mobayen, S. Robust fractional-order sliding mode tracker for quad-rotor uavs: event-triggered adaptive backstepping 
approach under disturbance and uncertainty. Aerosp. Sci. Technol.146, 108916 (2024).
 Author contributions
Xin Cai and Jie Dai: Writing-original draft. Fan Liu: Software. Ping Ye: Supervision
Funding
This research was funded by National Natural Science Foundation of China, grant number 11725211.
Declarations
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to X.C.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Publisher’s note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Scientific Reports |         (2026) 16:7758 
16
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-026-38931-8
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

## Page 17

Open Access   This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 
4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in 
any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide 
a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the licensed material. You do not have 
permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or 
other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated 
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence 
and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to 
obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit ​h​t​t​p​:​/​/​c​r​e​a​t​i​v​e​c​o​m​m​o​
n​s​.​o​r​g​/​l​i​c​e​n​s​e​s​/​b​y​-​n​c​-​n​d​/​4​.​0​/​.​
© The Author(s) 2026 
Scientific Reports |         (2026) 16:7758 
17
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-026-38931-8
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
