# s42401-025-00401-w.pdf

## Page 1

ORIGINAL PAPER
Aerospace Systems
https://doi.org/10.1007/s42401-025-00401-w
List of symbols
hd	
UAV desired altitude
ha	
UAV measured altitude
J	
Airplane inertia matrix
kp, ki, kd	
Is PID controller gains
pn, pe, pd	
Linear position in the inertial frame
p, q, r	
Body angular rates
u, v, w	
Linear velocity component
VUAV 	
Airplane cruise speed
x, y, z	
Linear Position components of the UAV
ϕ, θ, ψ	
Attitude angles
Abbreviations
FLC	
Feedback linearization controller
GNC	
Guidance, navigation, and control
HIL	
Hardware in the loop
IBKS	
Incremental backstepping
INDI	
Incremental nonlinear dynamic inversion
MINDI 
Modified incremental nonlinear dynamic 
Ehab Safwat and Yehia Z Elhalwagy contributed equally to this work.
	
 Ebrahim H. Kapeel
ebrahimkapeel@mtc.edu.eg
Ehab Safwat
e.khattab@mtc.edu.eg
Hossam Hendy
h.hendy@mtc.edu.eg
Ahmed M. Kamel
a.kamel@mtc.edu.eg
Yehia Z. Elhalwagy
yehia.elhalwagy@rst.edu.eg
1	
Guidance Department, Military Technical College, Cairo, 
Egypt
2	
Space Research Center, Military Technical College, Cairo, 
Egypt
3 
Dean of Faculty of Computers and Artificial Intelligence, 
University for Science and Technology, Cairo, Egypt
Abstract
UAV models are characterized by highly nonlinear behavior, strong coupling between longitudinal and lateral motions, 
and sensitivity to external disturbances and model mismatches, increasing flight control and guidance challenges. In this 
study, a robust attitude control algorithm for fixed-wing UAVs is developed and verified against model uncertainties and 
disturbances. Three different attitude control procedures are designed and analyzed with verification through simulations. 
A modified version of the nonlinear PI-D controller is designed to address the traditional drawbacks of the PID controller. 
Nonlinear control theory enhances the controller’s performance and achieves the system’s requirements. The nonlinear 
Dynamic Inversion (NDI) is applied, and due to its dependency on model accuracy, an incremental controller (INDI) and 
a modified version are designed to enhance robustness and tracking performance. Moreover, a backstepping controller 
(BKS) based on the Lyapunov function is applied to guarantee the system’s asymptotic stability and decrease its depen­
dency. Incremental Backstepping (IBKS) is proposed to increase the controller’s reliability against model mismatches and 
external disturbances. A comparative analysis is performed with and without uncertainties to evaluate the performance 
of each controller and estimate the optimum one to be implemented as a stand-alone flight controller. The results from 
simulations and uncertainty analysis demonstrated that the IBKS controller outperformed other controllers in terms of 
effectiveness and capability.
Keywords  UAV dynamic model · Attitude controller · Modified PI-D · Nonlinear dynamic inversion · Backstepping 
control · Monte-Carlo simulation
Received: 3 June 2025 / Revised: 25 July 2025 / Accepted: 11 August 2025
© Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2025
Comparative analysis between nonlinear attitude controllers for small 
fixed-wing UAV
Ebrahim H. Kapeel1 · Ehab Safwat1 · Hossam Hendy2 · Ahmed M. Kamel1 · Yehia Z. Elhalwagy3
1 3

## Page 2

Aerospace Systems
inversion
NDI	
Nonlinear dynamic inversion
NLGL	
Nonlinear guidance law
PID 
Proportional-integral-derivative
PI-D 
Modified proportional-integral-derivative
UAV 	
Unmanned aerial vehicle
6-DOF 
Six degrees of freedom
1  Introduction
Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) are low-cost precision-
guided vehicles widely used for several applications rather 
civilian such as environmental monitoring, agricultural, map­
ping, and infrastructure inspection, or military applications 
such as Intelligence, Surveillance, Target acquisition, and 
Reconnaissance (ISTAR) [1]. Designing a robust flight guid­
ance and control algorithm is a crucial challenge. For a high 
fidelity 6-DoF nonlinear UAV model, it is necessary to equip 
the UAVs with an autopilot for the Guidance, Navigation, and 
Control process [2]. Autopilot can be defined as the low-level 
control sequences that maintain airspeed, attitude angles, alti­
tude, and course heading. Its structure can be described in 
Fig. 1. The overall structure depends on the accuracy of the 
UAV navigation system [3].
The autopilot architecture is as follows:
	
●
State estimator: measures the output states obtained by 
using some filtering techniques applied to the raw data 
from the onboard sensors.
	
●
The Path planner: responsible for employing point-to-
point algorithms to generate path definitions for the Path 
follower layer, where the object is to steer from the start 
destination to the final destination.
	
●
The Path manager: is in charge of the UAV’s navigation, 
which is controlled by a finite-state machine that turns a 
sequence of waypoints into path primitives that the Path 
follower may track.
	
●
Finally, the path follower is used to maintain the UAV 
on the required path with the desired maneuver in the 
wind
Flight control systems based on PID structure have been 
successfully integrated as real-time control with several 
applications, particularly UAVs. This type of controller is 
widely preferred due to its simple structure without demand­
ing complex mathematical expressions, ease of implemen­
tation, and acceptable and sufficient performance according 
to its different structures [4]. There are two types of PID 
controllers: the first is used with linear models called lin­
ear PID, and the other is used with nonlinear models called 
nonlinear PID. In [5], B. Kada designed a linear PID attitude 
controller for its UAV linearized model, and its controller 
was acceptable in the case of zero uncertainties. Still, its per­
formance decreased gradually by increasing the percentage 
of uncertainty increased. On the other hand, the nonlinear 
UAV models contain the system’s nonlinearity effect, which 
is more accurate and reliable for testing the controller’s per­
formance. The nonlinear PID controller is the best choice 
for the control engineers and researchers as [6] Alaeddin 
Bani Milhim used the classical Nonlinear PID controller to 
control the quad-rotor UAV. This controller used the speed 
and the orientation of each propeller in the UAV’s hovering 
motion. Still, its performance didn’t show a perfect one to 
the desired trajectory tracking used for the comparison.
A modified PI-D controller is executed within the nonlin­
ear flight model to track the required reference angles. The 
work’s contribution to this structure has been presented in 
terms of the quick increase in software popularity, to easily 
relax enhancements in its performance and features. This 
type of controller deals directly with the UAV’s angular 
rates (inner loop), which gives substantial benefits such as:
	
●
it allows for a relaxed implementation of the UAV’s co­
ordinated turn, which in turn avoids losing altitude dur­
ing the UAV’s turning by augmenting a lift force com­
ponent by increasing the attack angle.
	
●
it avoids the set-point kick phenomenon and depends on 
the UAV’s angular rates directly provided by the naviga­
tion system. Moreover, the pure derivative term action 
of the classical nonlinear PID has disappeared.
	
●
Finally, a scaling gain is added to modulate the con­
trol action of the ailerons consistent with the measured 
airspeed.
Fig. 1  UAV’s autopilot architecture
 
1 3

## Page 3

Aerospace Systems
The significant disadvantage of the PID flight control system 
is the difficulty of getting the best performance, as it is pre­
cise and mostly around the equilibrium points. However, the 
performance is decreased regularly as the UAV’s dynamics 
change from the approximated linear model [7]. Nonlinear 
Dynamic Inversion (NDI) is a separate case of feedback lin­
earization that has been effectively investigated for applica­
tion to manned and unmanned aerial vehicles. The concept 
of the NDI is achieved by exact state conversions and feed­
back rather than using linear approximations of the dynam­
ics. NDI is regarded as the behavior of withdrawing the 
undesirable nonlinear dynamics. Dynamic inversion design 
proposals are a required solution to the UAV’s flight con­
trol as they efficiently decouple the model and successfully 
handle the system’s nonlinearity [8]. A comparison study 
between the gain-scheduled controller and the NDI flight 
control law was performed in [9] to ensure the superlative 
performance of NDI for tracking the required states and the 
advantage of rejecting the complexities involved in the gain 
scheduling and design weight variety. Due to the depen­
dency of the NDI on the system model, precise and accurate 
modeling should be performed to ensure the effectiveness of 
the DI flight controller. Several types of research have been 
established to improve the performance of the NDI, as it is 
model-dependent.
The incremental nonlinear dynamic inversion (INDI) 
retains the advantages of the NDI but tries to solve the iden­
tification issue by condensed model dependency. In recent 
research developed in [10], the INDI was applied to the atti­
tude control of the Tilt-Rotor Aircraft, and the performance 
evaluation was performed in case of high perturbations and 
aerodynamics uncertainties. In the end, a new approach was 
designed by Ehab Safwat in [11] to ensure the asymptotic 
stability and to compensate for the model’s uncertainties of 
the fixed-wing UAV through modifying a new control law 
that benefits from the NDI advantages and the model’s less 
dependency on INDI. In this work, the INDI structure is 
contributed by a modification to increase the system perfor­
mance and ensure the overall asymptotic stability.
One of the well-known recursive nonlinear controller 
algorithms is the Nonlinear Backstepping control system. 
The core principle of this technique is summarized in the 
decomposition of the controller into numerous steps to 
achieve its main function [8]. Backstepping control is inde­
pendent of a time scale separation, produces semi-global 
system stability, and is not fundamentally non-robust [12]. 
Moreover, it can easily be modified at a fast rate to explic­
itly handle external disturbances and uncertainties in a 
good manner, while it does not need a precisely estimated 
model, unlike feedback linearization. in [13], the researcher 
designed the backstepping controller for the quad-copter 
based on Lyapunov theory to ensure its stabilization in the 
required position and attitude. A good tracking performance 
of the proposed control is shown in the simulation results.
Another solution to overcome these difficulties is using a 
strategy based on incremental control action with the back­
stepping design called Incremental Backstepping (IBKS). 
The core of the strategic problem is treated with paramet­
ric uncertainties and bulky systems present in flight control 
systems, mostly due to the unmodeled dynamics and aero­
dynamics. The contribution of this controller type is that the 
IBKS is designed through a modification to the classical 
backstepping design organization that reduces its depen­
dency on the UAV model by estimating angular accelera­
tion. These modifications allow the controller design to take 
a control action incrementally to track the desired states of 
the nonlinear system, in contrast to regular backstepping.
2  UAV mathematical model
At first, a verified and high-accuracy model is essential due 
to the complexity, stochastically time-varying behavior, high 
coupling, and nonlinearity of UAV flight dynamics, which 
cannot be disregarded in simulation or analysis [14]. has 
developed a complete six-degree of freedom (6-DOF) and 
high-fidelity flight simulation model for the underlying small 
fixed-wing UAV that will be used as the case study. UAV 
mathematical representation model comprises nonlinear dif­
ferential equations that could define UAV motion and simu­
late UAV dynamics [15]. The simulation requires a precise 
mathematical model. Therefore, to develop a nonlinear simu­
lation model for the UAV, it is necessary to demonstrate the 
kinematics of the UAV and its dynamics as well. It comprises 
the development of the UAV Equations of Motion that con­
tains all forces and moments [16]. Fig. 2 shows the utilized 
UAV, and its geometric data is tabulated in Table 1.
2.1  Kinematic model
SUAV Linear motion represents the relation between the 
body velocities (u,v,w) and the first derivatives of SUAV 
position in an inertial frame (xn,ye,zd) without considering 
any forces according to (1).
( ˙xn
˙ye
˙zd
)
=
( cθcψ
sϕsθcψ −cϕsψ
cϕsθcψ −sϕsψ
cθsψ
sϕsθsψ −cϕcψ
cϕsθsψ −sϕcψ
−sθ
sϕcθ
cϕcθ
) ( u
v
w
)

(1)
The relation between the SUAV angular position or the Euler 
angles (φ, θ, ψ) described in the rotated frames and the air­
plane body angular rates (p, q, r)
1 3

## Page 4

Aerospace Systems
3  Attitude control system design
The attitude control loop tracks the desired angular rate and 
attitude angles. Several controllers are performed to enhance 
the tracking performance and guarantee system stability in 
case of model uncertainties or external disturbances.
3.1  Non-linear modified PI-D controller
In contrast with the traditional PID, a modified version is 
used to overcome several drawbacks, as mentioned above 
in the literature, and improve SUAV tracking performance.
3.1.1  Pitch channel
The attitude control loop for the pitch channel is designed 
based on the modified PI-D control technique to invest in the 
improvements mentioned above. The input to the pitch chan­
nel is the demanded pitch angle produced by the altitude loop, 
while the output is the desired elevator control command. In 
this structure, the controller deals directly with the pitch rate, 
which can easily be measured from the rate gyro. There is no 
pure derivative component like the conventional structure, so 
this will enhance the controller performance. There is another 
modification for the pitch channel loop, in which there is an 
additional term given by a correction of the pitch rate when 
the roll angle is not zero, called the turn compensation term 
[17].
In steady-level flight, two forces are acting on the UAV: 
the lift force upwards and the weight force of the UAV in 
the opposite direction. Throughout a turn, the lift turns at an 
angle ϕ away from the pitch plane. So, the lift force will be 
resolved into two components, one on the vertical plane and 
the other on the horizontal plane. If the aircraft needs to con­
tinue at the same altitude, the vertical lift component should 
equal the aircraft’s weight. This is illustrated as shown in 
Fig 3.


˙φ
˙θ
˙ψ

=
( 1
sϕtθ
cϕtθ
0
cϕ
−sϕ
0
sϕsecθ
cϕsecθ
) ( p
q
r
)

(2)
2.2  Dynamic model
The equations that relate the linear acceleration of SUAV and 
the total forces acting on the airplane are derived from New­
ton’s 2nd law in the body frame as (3).
( ˙u
˙v
˙w
)
=
( r ∗v−q ∗w
p ∗w−r ∗u
q ∗u−p ∗v
)
+
1
mass
( fx
fy
fz
)

(3)
Also, by applying Newton’s 2nd law for the angular motion, 
the relation between the angular acceleration and the total 
moment (M) applied to the airplane could be defined as (4).
( ˙p
˙q
˙r
)
=
( jxx
jxy
jxz
jyx
jyy
jyz
jzx
jzy
jzz
)
)−1 [
−wb/i×(J ∗wb/i)+M
]
(4)
Table 1  SUAV physical data
Property
Value
Wing area
1.231 m
Wing span
2.3 m
Root chord
0.24 m
Tip chord
0.19 m
Mass
4.21 kg
Ixx
0.89 kg/m2
Iyy
0.94 kg/m2
Izz
0.78 kg/m2
Fuselage length
1.5 m
Fig. 2  Case study of small fixed 
wing SUAV
 
1 3

## Page 5

Aerospace Systems
qaugm= g
V tan(ϕ)sin(ϕ)
(8)
Finally, the augmented pitch rate for pitch channel compen­
sation for any pitch angle (θ) can be defined as:
qaugm=
( g
V tan(ϕ)sin(ϕ)
)
cos (θ) ∗k1
(9)
R ... the curvature’s radius of the circular path of the UAV.
k1 .... tunable gain for the compensation block.
Lastly, a climbing achievement is presented to modest 
the elevator control commands according to the airspeed, 
for simplicity at high speed the fins are moved less, and at 
low speed are motivated extra. The estimation of PI-D gains 
is performed by the Ziegler-Nichols technique, followed by 
fine-tuning to guess the values of the gains.
3.1.2  Roll channel
The substantial accountability of the roll channel flight con­
trol loop is to track the roll angle (ϕc) generated from the 
outer guidance loop responsible for varying the UAV heading 
to follow the desired determined flight path. Furthermore, it 
overcomes the model divergence, rejects the external distur­
bances, and minimizes the coupling effect with the yaw chan­
nel. Likely, the pitch channel the derivative of the roll angle 
(ϕ), is considered to be the roll rate (p) for a small pitch angle 
in which (ϕ = ˙p) which can be directly measured from the 
feedback gyro.
To avoid losing the UAV’s altitude, it is necessary to cor­
rect this by increasing the attack angle (α), thus increas­
ing the overall lift force generated by the UAV’s wings. The 
necessary augmentation of the pitch rate is derived from the 
following:
Assuming the null wind disturbance, the total horizontal 
force is equal to the centripetal force:
Fcent=m ˙ψ2R
∵V = ˙ψR
∴Fcent=mV ˙ψ
The total horizontal force:
FLiftsin(ϕ) =mV ˙ψ
(5)
The total vertical force is equal to the gravity:
FLiftcos(ϕ) =mg∴˙ψ= g
V tan(ϕ)
(6)
From (6), this is the only yaw rate value where coordination 
can be achieved.
At first, for θ= 0, from (4) the pitch rate due to the yaw 
rate is expressed as follows:
q= ˙ψ sin(ϕ)
(7)
for a given value of ˙ψ is just an augmented pitch rate qaugm 
needed for turn compensation:
Fig. 3  Aircraft turn analysis
 
1 3

## Page 6

Aerospace Systems
[δa, δe, δr]T =bin
−1[νp−f(p),νq−f(q),νr−f(r)]T 
(14)
Where the dynamic matrix and the nonlinear functions could 
be described as:
bin =


Qsb
Ixx clδa
0
Qsb
Ixx clδr
0
Qsc
Iyy cmδe
0
Qsb
Izz cnδa
0
Qsb
Izz cnδr


f(p) =
[Iyy - Izz
Ixx
∗q ∗r + QSb
Ixx
∗
(
clo + clαα + clββ +
b
2Va
(
clpp + clrr
))]
f(q) =
[
Izz - Ixx
Iyy
∗p ∗r + Qsc
Iyy  
∗
(
cmo + cmαα +
c
2Va
(
cm ˙α ˙α + cmqq
))
f(r) =
[
Ixx - Iyy
Izz
∗p ∗q + Qsb
Izz
∗
(
cno + cnαα + cnββ +
b
2Va
(
cnpp + cnrr
))
3.2.2  Outer control loop
This outer slow loop is similar to the inner loop but differs 
in the controlled states and the required control action. the 
UAV dynamic states (α, β, µ) are controlled by the inner 
loop states (p, q, r). The outer control laws are planned based 
on performing the slow response of the outer loop by excit­
ing the fast dynamic loop. A fast-transient response is sup­
posed to have an insignificant consequence on the slow states. 
Equations (2–17) will describe the relationship between the 
angular rates and the attitude angles in (2).
[ ˙α, ˙β, ˙φ]T = [f(α),f(β),f(φ)]T +bout∗[p,q,r]T 
(15)
Applying the NDI in (15), where ν= [να, νβ, νφ]T is the con­
trol law for (α, β, φ) respectively described as the following:
[να, νβ, νφ]T =[kα∗eα, kβ∗eβ, kφ∗eφ]T 
(16)
3.2  Nonlinear dynamic inversion controller
The UAV’s flight attitude control generally consists of two 
loops, the first is the inner loop which relates between the 
fast states which are the angular rates (p, q, r) of the UAV 
and fin deflections needed (δa, δe, δr) as the control actions, 
and the second is the outer loop for the slow states (α, β, µ) 
controlled by (p, q, r). The two time-scale NDI technique 
used to achieve the desired attitudes is shown in Fig. 4, and 
the general equation describing the UAV model is described 
in (10).
˙x=f (x) +b (x) u
(10)
x ... the UAV’s states, u ... the control input.
f (x), b (x).... are nonlinear functions of the states.
According to the controlled state x, the control action 
u is determined. The general control action required is as 
described in (11).
u=b (x)−1[ ˙x−f (x) ]
(11)
The following sub-sections will describe the inner and outer 
control loops.
3.2.1  Inner control loop
For the inner fast loop, the UAV’s angular rates (x=p, q, r) 
are controlled by the control surfaces (u= δa, δe, δr), the 
angular rates are derived from (4) and described as:
[ ˙p, ˙q, ˙r]T = [f(p),f(q),f(r)]T +bin[δa, δe, δr]T 
(12)
Applying the NDI in (12), where ν= [νp, νq, νr]T are the con­
trol laws for (p, q, r) respectively described as the following:
[νp, νq, νr]T =[kp∗ep, kq∗eq, kr∗er]T 
(13)
ex= (xc−xm) ... the error between the desired state and the 
measured one from the UAV. (kp, kq, kr) The selected gains 
are to ensure evading the coupling between the inner and 
outer loop; the inner gains vary from 10 to 12.5. The control 
commands for the inner loop are as follows:
Fig. 4  Dynamic inversion control 
loops
 
1 3

## Page 7

Aerospace Systems
According to the standard values of the inner and the outer 
loop gains, an optimization technique is used to choose these 
gains to minimize the errors between the desired and the mea­
sured states, and the Monte Carlo simulation is performed 
as described in the following flowchart, as in Fig. 5. A cost 
function is selected to reduce the maximum squared error as 
shown in (23).
Kopt:min (et (t) ) =min
(
max
(
2√
( e 2
1+ e 2
2+ e 2
2)
))

(23)
3.3  Incremental nonlinear dynamic inversion
The NDI controller should be managed to be more robust 
against unmodeled dynamics, uncertainties, and disturbances. 
The NDI is completely model-dependent, and each control 
deflection command depends on the previous control action. 
In contrast, for the INDI, the generated control surface action 
is independent of the achieved previous one, i.e., each deflec­
tion is calculated for each sampling time of the designed con­
troller. Nevertheless, given that the present control deflection 
in evaluating the new deflection reduced the dependency of 
the model. Consequently, the attitude equations (24), (25) are 
expanded to contain the control command’s variation using 
a Taylor expansion. The expansion of the moment equa­
tion represented in (26) is the principle of the INDI control­
ler’s derivation, such that the first three terms are taken into 
account, and the terms of higher order are ignored.
IB ˙−→
ω B=−→
ω B×IB−→
ω B+−→
M B
(24)
IB ˙−→
ω B=−→
ω B×IB−→
ω B+−→
M a+−→
M cδ
(25)
−→
M a .... the aerodynamic moment of the airframe, −→
M c .... The 
moment is generated by the surface deflections.
˙−→
ω B≈IB
−1 ˙−→
ω B0+


∂
(
IB
−1 [−→
ω B×IB−→
ω B+−→
M a
])
∂ω
∆ω


ω0,δ0
+


∂
(
IB
−1−→
M cδ
)
∂δ
∆δ



(26)
The variation in moments is assumed to be more significant 
from the deflection of UAV’s surfaces than from the aerody­
namic forces; the variation in these aerodynamic forces will 
be neglected. This hypothesis is practical for a classical UAV 
configuration because the UAV fins are far from the CG. Con­
sequently, the second term of (26) is insignificant compared 
to the third. Hence, the attitude equation will tend to (27).
ex= (xc−xm) .... The error between the desired state and the 
measured one from the UAV. (kα, kβ, kφ) Are the selected 
gains to ensure evading the coupling between the inner and 
outer loop; usually, the outer loop gains are about 3 to 5. The 
control commands for the inner loop are as shown in (17).
[p, q, r]T =bout
−1[να−f(α),νβ−f(β),νφ−f(φ)]T 
(17)
Where,
bout=
[ −cosα tanβ
1
−sinα tanβ
sinα
0
−cosα
1
tanθ sinϕ
tanθ cosϕ
]

(18)
f (α) =FZcosα −(FX+T) sinα +F1
mVacosβ

(19)
f (β) =FY −T ∗cosαsinβ +F2
mVa

(20)
f (φ) = 0, F1=mg(cosαcosθcosϕ+sinαsinθ)

(21)
F2 = mg
(cosβ cosθ sinϕ + sinβ cosα sinθ
- sinα sinβ cosθ cosϕ
)

(22)
Fig. 5  Flowchart of Monte Carlo simulation
 
1 3

## Page 8

Aerospace Systems
˙e+ke= 0
(31)
Equation (31) is a first-order linear differential equation 
with the solution described in (32)
e (t) =ce−kt
(32)
This solution ensures the asymptotic stability of the system 
based on the proposed hypothesis. As well, increasing the 
gain will speed up the decay of the system and increase the 
rising time performance compared to the INDI as shown in 
Fig. 6, at which k1<k2<k3, the modified incremental non­
linear dynamic inversion (MINDI) is a fast model-indepen­
dent which guarantees asymptotic stability.
According to the previous modification, the MINDI con­
troller is designed for the inner and the outer loops described 
in (33), and (34), respectively.
[νp, νq, νr]T
=[ ˙pc−Kp (p−pc) , ˙qc−Kq (q−qc) , ˙rc−Kr (r−rc)]T 
(33)
[να, νβ, νφ]T
=
[
˙αc−Kα (α−αc) , ˙βc−Kβ (β−βc) , ˙φc−Kφ (φ−φc)
]T
(34)
3.5  Nonlinear backstepping controller
The function of the designed Backstepping controller is 
to follow the attitude commands α, β, and φ generated by 
the path follower under different flight environments with 
or without model uncertainties. The inner control loop is 
designed for controlling the UAV body angular rates corre­
spondingly using the surface commands δa, δe, and δr, the 
controller of the UAV angular rates is considered a virtual 
intermediate controller for the outer attitude loop. In other 
definition, the backstepping controller is divided into two 
controllers, and one is the virtual controller which controls 
the angular rates (p, q, r) controlled by the designed surface 
commands, and the other is the real controller (α, β, φ). 
According to the chosen Lyapunov Function (The idea is 
that it decreases over time, implying that the system tends 
to move towards equilibrium), the control commands are 
designed such that the first-order derivative of the Lyapu­
nov Function remains negative. Abusing the all-conve­
nient nonlinearities of the model and compensating for the 
other undesirable nonlinearities. The inner control loop is 
designed to be as fast as possible to disregard the transient 
responses of the fast angular states p, q, r. It adopts that the 
UAV angular rates track their desired values immediately 
without impacting the UAV outer loop dynamics. The back­
stepping control law can be described as follows:
˙−→
ω B≈IB
−1 ˙−→
ω B0+


∂
(
IB
−1−→
M cδ
)
∂δ
∆δ


ω0

(27)
By applying the INDI to the controlled states, then the 
approximated attitude equation is given in (28) with the angu­
lar acceleration as feedback states, and the incremental con­
trol output is described in (29).
[ ˙p, ˙q, ˙r]T ≈
[ ˙po
Ixx
, ˙qo
Iyy
, ˙ro
Izz
]T
+bin[∆δa, ∆δe, ∆δr]T 
(28)
[∆δa, ∆δe, ∆δr]T =bin
−1
[
νp−˙po
Ixx
, νq−˙qo
Iyy
, νr−˙ro
Izz
]T

(29)
The resultant controller is a model-independent one in which 
the uncertainties will be canceled by modifying NDI. Thus, 
INDI’s tracking performance and robustness are greater than 
NDI’s. Moreover, INDI effectively feeds back the measured 
angular accelerations using the navigation system.
3.4  Modified incremental nonlinear dynamic 
inversion
The considered control law is designed to be a proportional 
controller between the measured and the required states 
for both inner and outer loops, presented correspondingly. 
It’s needed to ensure the global asymptotic stability for the 
designed controller for the tracking error, regardless of the 
system’s initial conditions; this will be performed by modify­
ing the INDI controller as described in the following:
From (10) the control input:
u=b (x)−1( ˙x−f (x) )
(30)
Let: ˙x= ˙xc−k(x−xc)
∵ e=x−xc, ˙e= ˙x−˙xc, then the error could be described 
in a D.E as the following:
Fig. 6  System solution for the proposed solution
 
1 3

## Page 9

Aerospace Systems
∵˙e= −k1e, η=y−yd,
∴˙η= ˙y−˙yd,
From the physical system (39): ˙η=f2(x)+g2u−˙yd.
˙v (x) = −k1e2+η∗[f2+g2u−˙yd]
(43)
For the system to be asymptotically stable, the derivative 
of the Lyapunov Function must be negative; the first term 
in (43) is always negative, so we need to choose the control 
input u to ensure the overall function is negative.
Let: u=g−1
2 [−f2−k2η+ ˙yd], k2 .... The proportional gain 
of the physical system (39),
˙v (x) = −k1e2+η∗[f2+g2g−1
2 [−f2−k2η+ ˙yd]−˙yd]

(44)
˙v (x) = −k1e2−k2η2

(45)
So, our hypothesis of the control input u ensures that the 
first derivative of the Lyapunov Function is negative for all 
values of the proportional gains k1, k2> 0. The main equa­
tions representing the two systems are as follows:
yd=g−1
1
[ ˙xd−k1e−f(x)]

(46)
u=g−1
2 [−f2−k2η+ ˙yd]

(47)
The attitude vector equation will be formulated as follows 
for the virtual system:
The virtual control is designed as follows:


˙α
˙β
˙ϕ

=
[ f1 (α)
f1 (β)
f1 (φ)
]
+g1 (x)
[ p
q
r
]

(48)
where 
f1 (α) = FZcosα −(FX + T) sin α + FαgB
mVa cos β
f1 (β) = FY −T cos α sin β + FβgB
mVa
f1 (φ) = 0
g1 (x) =
[ −cos αtanβ
1
−sin α tan β
sin α
0
−cos α
1
tan θ sin ϕ
tanθ cos ϕ
]
.
The physical control is designed as:
[ ˙p
˙q
˙r
]
=
[ f2 (p)
f2 (q)
f2 (r)
]
+g2 (x)
[ δa
δe
δr
]

(49)
˙x=f (x) +g (x) y1

(35)
˙y1=f1 (x, y1, y2)

(36)
˙yn=fn (x, y1, y2, . . . ,yn, u)

(37)
x ... vector of the system state, y1......,n ... intermediate states 
of the system, f1.....,n .... Nonlinear functions relate to the 
system’s states.
Each subsystem denoted by the states yi(i= 1, ...,n) is 
controlled by the virtual control input yi+1. So, the control­
ler is in a cascaded formula in which the lower state is con­
trolled by the higher state and treated as a virtual control. 
A Lyapunov function is utilized for each virtual controller 
in the stability investigation. The design controllers for the 
attitude angles (the angle of attack α, side-slip β, and roll 
angle ϕ) can be characterized by the states y1, y2, and y3 
and controlled by virtual control of the angular rates 
(p, q, r). On the other hand, the body angular rates could be 
controlled by using the physical control input of the UAV 
model u=[δa, δe, δr]T . By considering that the two equa­
tions represent the virtual and physical systems as the fol­
lowing feedback second-order cascaded form given in (38)
(39).
˙x=f1 (x) +g1 (x) y1 →yc the virtual control

(38)
˙y=f2 (x) +g2 (x) u →u
the physical control

(39)
The backstepping control procedure depends on the virtual 
control yd that ensures the internal system stability. The vir­
tual control yd is designed from (38) to track the desired 
state xd and guarantees the asymptotic stability of system 
(39). The following derivation evaluates the virtual control 
input yd and the physical control input u.
From the (38) the desired control input:
yd=g−1
1
[ ˙x−f1(x)]
(40)
Let: ˙x= ˙xd−k1e
e=x−xd, k1 .... The proportional gain of the virtual sys­
tem (38).
yd=g−1
1
[ ˙xd−k1e−f(x)]
(41)
let the Lyapunov Function: v (x) = 1
2e2+ 1
2η2
η=y−yd. The first derivative of the Lyapunov Function 
˙v (x) < 0.
˙v (x) =e˙e+η ˙η
(42)
1 3

## Page 10

Aerospace Systems
Where, ∆δ=δ−δ0 denotes the incremental control action 
required instantly to achieve a certain command. The 
robustness of the designed IBKS control law is better than 
the BKS control due to it being less model-dependent, 
which means that the model uncertainties could be avoided 
by incremental action. On the other side, the IBKS control­
ler makes an intelligence for a real-time implementation as 
a stand-alone flight controller, while the angular accelera­
tion should be predicted for feedback. The control surface 
actions are obtained by adding the derived incremental con­
trol law to the previous control actions as given in (53).
[δa, δe, δr]T =[∆δa, ∆δe, ∆δr]T +[δao, δeo, δro]T 
(53)
4   Simulation results and analysis
4.1  Nonlinear modified PI-D controller
The pitch channel will evaluate controller performance 
using the common standard reference input as a desired 
reference pitch angle given in Fig. 7, while the related 
coupled attitude angles, roll and side-slip angle remain 
zero. The tracking response for the designed flight control 
system based on the PI-D controller confirms its capabil­
ity to be implemented with the nonlinear UAV model. As 
shown in Fig. 7a, the rising time is 0.68 sec, and the maxi­
mum overshoot is 1.5%, which is the best tracking perfor­
mance according to the UAV capability. For the inner loop 
of the pitch channel, the achieved pitch rate by the UAV is 
approximately within the acceptable range for small UAVs, 
as presented in Fig. 7b; the PI-D controller is considered 
one of the robust controllers for complex industrial systems. 
Different uncertainty values are applied to the UAV model 
to validate the designed controller’s performance. Firstly, 
5% uncertainty is applied, and the system performance is 
decreased as the overshoot and steady-state error increase. 
By increasing the model uncertainty up to 20%, the system 
overshoot increased by a large value, as well as the steady 
error. Moreover, for 40% uncertainty, the performance 
becomes the worst as the system oscillates with a very large 
overshoot and maximum steady error. This analysis is pre­
sented in Fig. 8, with the performance of the UAV’s rates, 
which decreases with the increase of the model mismatches. 
The performance analysis of this response is tabulated in 
Table 2.
4.2  Nonlinear dynamic inversion controllers
The response of the pitch channel is analyzed to validate the 
designed pitch controller. Once the perfect UAV model is 
Where, f2 (p) , f2 (q) , f2 (r) , and g2 (x) are given in 
(NDI).
As aforementioned, we will arrange our controllers as in 
(48) and (49) to get the general form in (50).
[ δa
δe
δr
]
=g−1
2
(x)
[
˙pc−kp (pc−p) −f2 (p)
˙qc−kq (qc−q) −f2 (q)
˙rc −kr (rc−r) −f2 (r)
]
−g1 (x)
[ αc−α
βc−β
ϕc−ϕ
]

(50)
Although the Backstepping control technique is formulated 
based on the Lyapunov stability theorem, which guarantees 
the system’s robustness, it incompletely depends on the 
designed model, which suffers from mismatches. Moreover, 
the designed controller depends on the rate of change of the 
virtual controller, which produces a sudden variation in case 
the polarity of the anticipated attitude command is varied.
3.6  Incremental backstepping controller
There is a need to design an improvement for the Backstep­
ping law to modify the system tracking. This modification 
is designed based on the incremental control action of the 
Backstepping with the angular acceleration feedback. Con­
sequently, for achieving the IBKS control law, the angular 
acceleration (p, q, r) must be predicted as there is no avail­
able direct way of measurement of it, as well as there is no 
suitable small-size and lightweight sensor to provide it.
The IBKS controllers can track the outer loop control 
states of the model incrementally, accounting for great para­
metric and model uncertainties. The commanded filter is 
introduced to avoid the analytical computation of the rate 
of change of the virtual control commands. One of the sig­
nificant advantages of the commanded filter is providing 
bounds with the desired saturation limits of each angular 
rate and continuous virtual commands with their bounded 
derivatives.
By applying the incremental action described in (NDI) 
to the system described in (49), it can be reformulated to 
design an Incremental BKS (IBKS) controller. Applying 
BKS control law to the moment equation (51) results in an 
expression for the incremental change of the input control 
surface deflections given in (52).
[ ˙p, ˙q, ˙r]T ≈
[ ˙po
Ixx
, ˙qo
Iyy
, ˙ro
Izz
]T
+g2 (x) [∆δa, ∆δe, ∆δr]T

(51)
[ ∆δa
∆δe
∆δr
]
=


qdSb
Ixx clδa
0
qdSb
Ixx cδδr
0
qdSc
Iyy cmδe
0
qdSb
Izz cnδa
0
qdSb
Izz cnδr


−1





˙pc−kp (pc−p) −˙po
Ixx
˙qc−kq (qc−q) −˙qo
Iyy
˙rc−kr (rc−r) −˙ro
Izz

−g1 (x)
[ αc−α
βc−β
ϕc−ϕ
]



(52)
1 3

## Page 11

Aerospace Systems
modification of the asymptotic stability (MINDI controller) 
introduces a better tracking performance compared to the 
other controllers, as shown in Fig. 9a. The pitch rate is lim­
ited to ±15 deg/sec to avoid the two loops coupling as shown 
in Fig. 9b. Not only does the NDI controller achieve the 
accepted tracking performance, but also the two other con­
trollers, INDI and MINDI, are respectable tracking ones.
To validate the robustness of the designed attitude con­
trollers, their performances are evaluated by adding uncer­
tainties to the designed model. A gradual rise of these model 
uncertainties will be established to confirm the need for the 
modified controller MINDI for better performance and best 
tracking. The tracking response of the pitch angle is pre­
sented in Fig. 10afor the designed controllers in the pres­
ence of a 5% uncertainty of the model. The ordinary NDI 
controller tends to track the uncertainty with the acceptable 
presented, the NDI controller will dominate any other con­
trollers because it is model-dependent, assurances perfect 
tracking of the required attitude angles. The response of the 
pitch angle tracked based on the NDI controller is given in 
Fig. 9, which approves the ability of the NDI controller to fol­
low the generated maneuver with acceptable performance. In 
the meantime, the response of the designed control technique 
built on INDI presents the same response as shown in Fig. 9 
despite decreasing its dependency on the designed model. On 
the other hand, the designed controller based on the presented 
Table 2  Comparison analysis for the pitch channel
Uncertainty (%)
Rising time (sec)
Overshoot (%)
5
0.51
5
20
0.53
20
40
0.56
52
Fig. 8  Pitch channel tracking loops with uncertainties
 
Fig. 7  Pitch channel tracking loops
 
1 3

## Page 12

Aerospace Systems
shows the capability of the inner loop to track the perfor­
mance of the MINDI to overcome the model uncertainty 
compared to other controllers, which confirms the need for 
the modified controller.
From the previous analysis, the MINDI shows its best 
tracking performance and robustness against the uncertain­
ties of the UAV model. Also, to increase the controller’s 
confidence, 40% of uncertainty is performed as shown in 
Fig. 12. The NDI becomes increasingly sensitive to this 
uncertainty and cannot acceptably track the desired pitch 
angle, as shown in Fig. 12a. Even though the INDI is 
model-dependent, it performs less than the MINDI in case 
of large uncertainty. Also, the tracking error in the pitch rate 
shown in Fig. 12bis smaller in MINDI than in the two other 
controllers.
The time-domain response analysis of the designed con­
trollers for the UAV model is presented to analyze each 
controller’s tracking performance and its robustness with 
response, but not as the same response without uncertain­
ties. On the contrary, the INDI and MINDI controllers are 
more robust and perform better against the model uncer­
tainty than the NDI, but they are still less sensitive to model 
variation. The inner loop response, which describes the 
pitch rate tracking act, is shown in Fig. 10b; it confirms the 
powerful performance of the MINDI controller compared to 
the other controllers, which also have a better performance 
but less the MINDI. The uncertainty is increased by 20% to 
ensure the controller’s performance and robustness against 
the increasing model mismatch. As shown in Fig. 11a, the 
NDI controller begins to make a higher overshoot than the 
INDI and MINDI. Besides, the transient time response of 
the modified controllers is faster and more robust, according 
to the NDI. However, the INDI still behaves in an accepted 
manner compared to the NDI; its performance is less than 
that of the MINDI, which is faster and more stable. The 
angular pitch rate response which is shown in Fig. 11b, 
Fig. 10  Tracking performance of NDI controllers with 5% uncertainty
 
Fig. 9  Tracking performance of NDI controllers
 
1 3

## Page 13

Aerospace Systems
exceeding the predesigned percentage of the uncertainty 
as shown in Fig. (13), the simulation is done for 100 runs, 
then the average value is computed and recorded for error in 
angle as shown in Fig. 14.
PI=
∫t
0
e2 (t) dt
(54)
As shown in Fig. 14a, the performance index for the 
designed controllers shows the priority of the INDI and the 
MINDI controllers compared to the NDI one. The MINDI 
has proved its high tracking performance and its robustness 
as its PI is the best one however the a high increase in the 
model’s uncertainty. In addition, the angular rate in the inner 
loop is presented in Fig. 14b. However, the rate of error 
for the INDI has increased. It still has an acceptable per­
formance due to its priority in the outer loop. The MINDI 
is still more robust in the inner and outer loops. Therefore, 
different uncertainties. The rising time, system overshoot, 
and pitch rate are tabulated in Table 3.
A performance index (PI) described in (54) compares the 
three controllers according to the normalized integral of the 
square error. A Monte Carlo simulation is performed to cal­
culate the PI in which the uncertainty parameter is described 
by a random value with a mean and standard deviation not 
Fig. 13  Definition of the model uncertainty
 
Fig. 12  Tracking performance of NDI controllers 40% uncertainty
 
Fig. 11  Tracking performance of NDI controllers 20% uncertainty
 
1 3

## Page 14

Aerospace Systems
without any mismatch, and the BKS controller tracks the 
desired input as expected in a good performance. However, 
the IBKS is slightly faster, as shown in Fig. 15afor the pitch 
angle response. Similarly, the inner loop tracking response 
for the two controllers behaves respectably as presented in 
Fig. 15b. In the case of perfect model estimation, the two con­
trollers are suitable for the UAV’s model. Therefore, the two 
controllers should be tested in case of model uncertainties to 
evaluate each controller’s performance.
Increasing the model uncertainty to 5%and applying the 
standard input as shown in Fig. 16 for the pitch angle and 
rate. The performance tracking of the IBKS shows its supe­
riority rather in pitch tracking or the pitch rate stability, as 
shown in Fig. 16a the classical Backstepping behaves with 
more overshooting in its response in contrast with the IBKS 
which is more robust without any percentage of overshoot­
ing and faster with 0.2 sec in rising time, the ability of the 
IBKS controller to withstand against model uncertainty is 
obvious as shown, by increasing the model mismatch to 
20% and testing the controller’s performance as shown in 
Fig. 17, the backstepping controller becomes inappropri­
ate to deal with this high value of model uncertainty as its 
performance turns out to be affected by the mismatches 
according to the tracking performance, time response analy­
sis, and performance index, the MINDI is the best dynamic 
inversion controller that could be considered a stand-alone 
asymptotic stable controller for the UAV’s attitude control.
4.3  Nonlinear backstepping controllers
The tracking performance of the designed nonlinear con­
trollers based on the backstepping control of the designed 
controller is analyzed based on their robustness and fastness 
against different conditions, such as external disturbances and 
highly erroneous model parameters. The IBKS controller is 
compared with the Backstepping one for tracking maneu­
vers in the pitch channel, and the transient response analy­
sis of the designed controller has been presented to highlight 
the ability of each controller to accomplish the desired and 
accepted performance. The evaluation of the designed non­
linear controller’s robustness against uncertainties is first 
presented. Furthermore, the time-domain tracking response 
of the desired transitional virtual pitch angular rate control 
law specifies the interior stability of the closed-loop flight 
control system. At the beginning, as shown in Fig. 15. The 
doublet response is investigated for the designed controllers 
Table 3  Comparison analysis of the pitch channel DI controllers
Rising time (sec)
Overshoot (%)
Pitch rate error (deg/sec)
Uncertainty
NDI
INDI
MINDI
NDI
INDI
MINDI
NDI
INDI
MINDI
without
1.1
1.15
0.75
4
2.2
1
1
0.2
0.1
5%1
1.15
1.2
0.75
10
3
2
2.5
1
0.5
20%2
1.2
1.2
0.75
16.5
6
4
4
2
1.21
40%3
1.25
1.2
0.8
30
15
14
5
2.6
1.9
1The Uncertainty value in UAV’s Moment of Inertia sub-model
2The Uncertainty value in UAV’s Moment of Inertia sub-model and Geometric sub-model
3The Uncertainty value in UAV’s Moment of Inertia sub-model, Geometric sub-model, and Aerodynamic sub-model
Fig. 14  Performance index of the DI controllers
 
1 3

## Page 15

Aerospace Systems
Fig. 17  Tracking performance of BKS controllers with 20% uncertainty
 
Fig. 16  Tracking performance of BKS controllers with 5% uncertainty
 
Fig. 15  Tracking performance of BKS controllers
 
1 3

## Page 16

Aerospace Systems
A Monte-Carlo simulation estimates the performance 
index (PI) described in the NDI controller. To evaluate the 
performance of the designed controllers according to the 
normalized integral of the square error, the average value 
is calculated and recorded for both the error in angle and 
the pitch rate as shown in Fig. 19, for the angle error PI 
as shown in Fig. 19a, the IBKS controller has proved its 
robustness compared to the backstepping one however the 
increasing value of the aerodynamic uncertainties. Besides, 
the PI of the pitch rate for the IBKS controller is more robust 
and less than the classical one, as presented in Fig. 19b. The 
validation of the IBKS controller, which is performed using 
the time analysis and the PI analysis, ensures the capability 
of the incremental controller to withstand the model uncer­
tainties or any external disturbances. Accordingly, the IBKS 
controller could be used as the attitude controller for our 
small fixed-wing UAV.
and starts to perform slight oscillation with a high over­
shoot response compared to the IBKS controller which is 
more stable, robust, and faster as shown in Fig. 17a. cor­
respondingly, the pitch rate response of the IBKS control­
ler is more stable and its performance is in a good manner 
due to its small error rate as presented in Fig. 17b. Although 
the uncertainties have increased, the IBKS is still the most 
robust and fastest controller against model mismatches. 
Finally, many uncertainties are applied to the UAV model 
to ensure the superiority of the IBKS controller. As shown 
in Fig. 18, 40% of uncertainties are applied to our model. 
The IBKS controllers exhibit a good tracking performance 
with slight overshooting, which is the best one compared to 
the poor tracking manner of the Backstepping, rather in the 
angle track in Fig. 18aor the pitch rate response in Fig. 18b
A comparative study is conducted between the designed 
controllers to evaluate the performance of each controller 
for the rising time, overshoot, and pitch rate error as pre­
sented in Table 4. The IBKS controller has proved its ability 
to track the desired commands with or without any model 
uncertainties. This superiority shows that it can be used as a 
stand-alone controller for the UAV attitude control.
Table 4  Comparison analysis of the pitch channel BKS controllers
Uncertainty
Rising time (sec)
Overshoot (%)
Pitch rate error (deg/sec)
BKS
IBKS
BKS
IBKS
BKS
IBKS
Without
0.51
0.5
0.4
0
0.1
0.1
5%1
0.52
0.5
6
0.2
1.5
0.62
20%2
0.54
0.5
12
0.8
2
1.3
40%3
0.66
0.51
25
5
4
2
1The Uncertainty value in UAV’s Moment of Inertia sub-model
2The Uncertainty value in UAV’s Moment of Inertia sub-model and Geometric sub-model
3The Uncertainty value in UAV’s Moment of Inertia sub-model, Geometric sub-model, and Aerodynamic sub-model
Fig. 18  Tracking performance of BKS controllers with 40% uncertainty
 
1 3

## Page 17

Aerospace Systems
The second control law is based on the feedback linear­
ization method and its modified incremental law, which 
largely depends on the accurate system model. The main 
advantage of the NDI controller is the ideal performance 
tracking if and only if the model is ideally represented. 
Moreover, the incremental modification could withstand 
and guarantee system stability if any model mismatches 
exist. On the other hand, the model-dependent flight control 
law is not robust against any external disturbances, and even 
the modified version is not robust against high uncertainties 
as it was introduced. The most serious failure case with the 
NDI controller is the singularity problem. It could also pres­
ent a good performance, but with high control effort that can 
affect the system’s reliability. NDI should be improved with 
another robust controller, such as PID, to solve the trade-off 
issue, but the system complexity and execution time will 
increase.
Finally, the BKS controller and the NDI control law are 
considered alternative controllers for each other. However, 
the nonlinearity part is exploited in designing the control 
law. Meanwhile, the undesirable nonlinearities are elimi­
nated by adding nonlinear terms to confirm the Lyapu­
nov direct theorem. Accordingly, based on the designated 
Lyapunov function, the overall control system is globally 
asymptotically stable whenever all initial states. The BKS 
controller provides the designer with an appealing manner 
to develop and assess the proposed controller based on a 
systematic method of selecting a positive definite LF and 
gradually finding the control law to ensure the derivative of 
the selected LF is negative. Consequently, compared to any 
other nonlinear controller, the development time for creat­
ing the control law is predicted to be quite short, as shown 
in the comparison below. The ability to upgrade the control­
ler to a general stand-alone flight controller by optimally 
5  Results and discussion
The most essential characteristic of the developed flight 
control law is that it ensures the system’s global asymptotic 
stability while tracking the desired reference input. In the 
meantime, the flight control system should accomplish excel­
lent tracking performance, including rapid, low overshoot, 
smooth transient response, and finding the best robustness. 
The evaluation of the designed attitude controller and the 
requirements could be classified according to features such 
as stability, robustness, cost, and overall system performance. 
The above-mentioned features are related and conflict with 
each other, as the flight controller couldn’t satisfy all the 
required features simultaneously. Therefore, the essential 
account of the control designer is to methodically design an 
optimal design and solution to the trade-off issue between the 
required performance and accomplishing high robustness. In 
this work, three attitude control systems have been designed 
and analyzed; the first controller is the modified nonlinear 
PI-D controller, the Nonlinear Dynamic Inversion and its 
modification, and finally, the backstepping controller and its 
incremental version of modified backstepping.
Initially, the PID controller could be regarded as the most 
consistent flight controller suitable for several unmanned 
systems, past and present. It gains this feature due to its 
simplicity, ease of implementation, and low cost. Modify­
ing the classical PID gives it superiority and reliability over 
most controllers. Nevertheless, it has disadvantages, such as 
adapting to different environmental conditions. Therefore, 
several offline validations are essential. Likewise, its track­
ing performance is not optimal, as described below, due to 
its operation being around the equilibrium point, and the 
performance is reduced gradually as the system dynamics 
move away from this operating point.
Fig. 19  Performance index of the BKS controllers
 
1 3

## Page 18

Aerospace Systems
fastest one, and its performance is acceptable and guaran­
tees the system’s asymptotic stability compared to the other 
ones. With a great increase of the model disturbances up to 
40%, the IBKS shows its rapid response with an 8% over­
shoot, which is an acceptable value compared to the MINDI 
controller, that begins to make a large overshoot up to 35%, 
and the PI-D one which achieves a very large overshoot to 
52% and oscillates in the pitching rate and can’t overcome 
this disturbance gradually such as the IBKS one that when­
ever the disturbance occurs, it returns to the desired state 
which proves the global asymptotic stability theorem of the 
Lyapunov function. From the previous analysis, the back­
stepping controller is one of the best nonlinear controllers 
compared to the dynamic inversion one or the Modified PID. 
Furthermore, it shows a fast response and less control effort 
in pitching rate compared to the modified PI-D controller. 
Therefore, the IBSK controller will be used as the stand-
alone attitude controller for our small fixed-wing UAV. The 
performance of these controllers is tabulated in Table 5. The 
performance index of the tracking response is estimated for 
the pitch channel with the Monte-Carlo simulation, and the 
normalized average values are represented in Fig. 20.
6  Summary
The overall flight control system of the UAV is studied, 
designed, and implemented. Starting from the altitude track­
ing loop, velocity control loop, and attitude tracking loop. 
For the altitude loop, a PI controller is utilized to control the 
UAV’s altitude, and the simulation analysis shows the accept­
able performance of this type of controller. Also, the classical 
PID controller is implemented with the velocity control loop 
to regulate the UAV’s velocity during the overall flight. The 
evaluation of this controller is introduced with and without 
wind disturbance and shows a good tracking performance. 
Finally, different controllers are performed with the UAV’s 
attitude loop. Firstly, a nonlinear PI-D controller tracks 
the desired attitude angles; it performs well without model 
uncertainties. However, increasing these uncertainties makes 
it unstable and presents a high coupling with the UAV’s 
solving the trade-off problem is one of the most important 
advantages of using the BKS control law. On the other 
hand, the downside of the BKS controller is the designed 
model’s fractional dependence, which reduces the system’s 
robustness. Also, the complexity of the BKS is increased by 
increasing the system’s hierarchy that virtually controls the 
sequential system until the accomplishment of the physi­
cal control input confirms the stability of the closed-loop 
system. However, this issue could be solved with increased 
processors and their related software.
According to the designed flight controllers, a compara­
tive study and analysis are performed to evaluate the best 
controller’s performance to be implemented as a stand-
alone attitude control with the case study fixed-wing UAV. 
The analysis is accomplished in the following pitch:
A doublet input is applied to the three models of differ­
ent controllers, and the time analysis is performed according 
to rising time, overshooting, steady state error, and pitch­
ing rate error. From the previous analysis, the system is fast 
and more stable, but the IBKS controller is faster and has 
less overshoot than the other controllers. Also, the tracking 
performance of the IBKS in pitching rate does not exceed 
±15 deg/sec, in contrast with PI-D, which reaches about ±18 
deg/sec. So, the backstepping control is the optimum solu­
tion that could be used in the case study UAV compared to 
the other designed controllers due to its robustness and fast 
response. The backstepping controller is validated accord­
ing to the previous model uncertainties analysis to increase 
the controller’s reliability and be more trusted against any 
model mismatches and external disturbances. At first, the 
model’s disturbance up to 5% of the aerodynamic and mass-
inertia model, the three controllers show a good tracking 
performance, the MINDI controller performed a small value 
of overshoot, in contrast, the IBKS isn’t affected at all with 
the model mismatch and still present the best performance 
with small pitching rate value compared to the other con­
trollers. The percentage of model mismatches has increased 
to 20% to increase the model validation against the high 
disturbances. The overshooting of the MINDI controller is 
increased, and the IBKS controller starts to overshoot but 
with a small value that doesn’t exceed 5% and is still the 
Table 5  Comparison analysis for the Proposed controllers
Uncertainty
Rising time (sec)
Overshoot (%)
Pitch rate error (deg/sec)
PI-D
MINDI
IBKS
PI-D
MINDI
IBKS
PI-D
MINDI
IBKS
Without
0.68
0.75
0.5
1.5
1
0
2
0.08
0.1
5%1
0.65
0.75
0.5
5
2
0.2
7
0.5
0.62
20%2
0.53
0.75
0.5
20
4
0.8
12
1.21
1.3
40%3
0.56
0.8
0.51
52
14
5
18
1.9
2
1The Uncertainty value in UAV’s Moment of Inertia sub-model
2The Uncertainty value in UAV’s Moment of Inertia sub-model and Geometric sub-model
3The Uncertainty value in UAV’s Moment of Inertia sub-model, Geometric sub-model, and Aerodynamic sub-model
1 3

## Page 19

Aerospace Systems
15%, Yehia Z. Elhalwagy contributes by 5%, and Hossam Hendy con­
tributes by 10%.
Data availability  The 6-DOF nonlinear UAV model that was used to 
compare the different nonlinear controllers was published in the Jour­
nal of Unmanned Systems with the following link: ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​
1​4​2​/​S​2​3​0​1​3​8​5​0​2​3​5​0​0​1​5​2 In addition, all controllers’ models and data 
that support the results of this study are available from the correspond­
ing author upon reasonable request.
Declarations
Conflict of interest  The authors of this paper have no Conflict of inter­
est to declare. Also, this statement indicates that the authors have no 
financial or personal interests that could influence the research find­
ings. Additionally, it clarifies that the research was not funded by any 
external sources that might introduce a Conflict of interest.
Consent for participation and publication   all the authors mentioned 
in the manuscript have agreed to authorship, read and approved the 
manuscript, and given consent for submission and subsequent publica­
tion of the manuscript.
References
1.	
Wu W, Wang Y, Gong C, Ma D (2022) Path following control for 
miniature fixed-wing unmanned aerial vehicles under uncertain­
ties and disturbances: a two-layered framework. Nonlinear Dyn 
108(4):3761–3781. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​0​7​/​s​1​1​0​7​1​-​0​2​2​-​0​7​4​5​0​-​2
2. 
He S, Lee C-H, Shin H-S, Tsourdos A (2020) Optimal guidance 
and its applications in missiles and UAVs. Springer, Beijing Insti­
tute of Technology
3.	
Yanushevsky R (2011) Guidance of unmanned aerial vehicles. 
Taylor & Francis, CRC Press
4.	
Nguyen HL, Quyen TV, Nguyen C, Le AD, Tran H, Nguyen MT 
(2020) Control algorithms for UAVs: a comprehensive survey. 
EAI Endorsed Trans Indus Netw Intell Syst 7(23):164–586. ​h​t​t​p​s​
:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​4​1​0​8​/​e​a​i​.​1​8​-​5​-​2​0​2​0​.​1​6​4​5​8​6
5. 
Kada B (2011) Robust PID controller design for an UAV flight 
control system. Proceedings of the world congress on engineering 
and computer scienceAt San Francisco USA Volume:2
channels. The NDI controller is used to overcome the draw­
backs of the PI-D controller. The performance of the NDI 
is more accepted than the PI-D, but it’s a model-dependent 
controller, and any model mismatch will decrease its perfor­
mance. Therefore, the INDI is used to be less dependent on 
the UAV’s dynamic model, and another modification is added 
to ensure the asymptotic stability of the system. Another type 
of nonlinear control is performed in our research to design 
a high-performance controller. The BKS controller is gen­
erally based on Lyapunov theory to ensure system stability 
with high tracking performance, and the BKS controller is 
enhanced and incremented to be a model-independent, stand­
alone controller. By performing a comparative analysis, the 
performance of various designed controllers is thoroughly 
evaluated. This process helps identify the strengths and weak­
nesses of each controller. Ultimately, it leads to the selection 
of the most optimal controller based on the analysis. The 
IBKS controller demonstrates its clear superiority in both 
stability performance and disturbance rejection capabilities. 
Through rigorous testing and evaluation, it has consistently 
outperformed other controllers in maintaining system stabil­
ity under varying conditions. Its advanced algorithms and 
robust design allow it to effectively mitigate disturbances, 
ensuring smooth and reliable operation. These strengths 
make the IBKS controller an exemplary choice for applica­
tions requiring high stability and resilience against disrup­
tions. Consequently, it stands out as a preferred solution for 
achieving optimal control performance in complex systems.
Acknowledgements  I declare that this thesis was composed by me, 
that the work contained herein is my own except where explicitly 
stated otherwise in the text, and that this work has not been submitted 
for any other degree or professional qualification except as specified.
Authors’ contribution  The authors’ contribution is as follows: Ebra­
him H. Kapeel contributes by 70%, Ahmed M. Kamel contributes by 
Fig. 20  Performance index of the proposed controllers
 
1 3

## Page 20

Aerospace Systems
13.	 Madani T, Benallegue A (2006) Backstepping control for a 
quadrotor helicopter. Intell Robot Syst. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​9​/​i​
r​o​s​.​2​0​0​6​.​2​8​2​4​3​3
14.	 Kapeel EH, Safwat E, Kamal AM, Khalil MK, Elhalwagy YZ, 
Hendy H (2022) Physical modeling, simulation and validation of 
small fixed-wing UAV. Unmanned Systems 11(04):327–350. ​h​t​t​p​
s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​4​2​/​s​2​3​0​1​3​8​5​0​2​3​5​0​0​1​5​2
15.	 Beard RW, McLain TW (2012) Small unmanned aircraft. Princ­
eton University Press, Princetion and Oxord
16. Keane AJ, Sóbester A, Scanlan JP (2017) Small unmanned fixed-
wing aircraft design. Wiley, University of Southampton UK
17. FarÌ S (2017) Guidance and control for a fixed-wing UAV. PhD 
thesis ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​3​1​4​0​/​R​G​.​2​.​2​.​2​4​9​7​3​.​2​8​6​4​1
Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds 
exclusive rights to this article under a publishing agreement with the 
author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted 
manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of 
such publishing agreement and applicable law.
6. 
Milhim AB, Zhang Y, Rabbath CA (2010) Quad-rotor UAV: 
High-fidelity modeling and nonlinear PID control. AIAA Model 
Simul Technol Conf. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​2​5​1​4​/​6​.​2​0​1​0​-​8​3​6​2
7.	
Xie Y, Huang H, Hu Y (2016) Applications of advanced control 
methods in spacecrafts: progress, challenges, and future pros­
pects. Front Inform Technol Electron Eng 17(9):841–861. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​
/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​6​3​1​/​f​i​t​e​e​.​1​6​0​1​0​6​3
8.	
Cheng D, Hu X, Shen T (2011) Analysis and design of nonlinear 
control systems. Springer, Imperial College London
9. 
Snell SA, Enns DF, Garrard WL (1992) Nonlinear inversion flight 
control for a supermaneuverable aircraft. J Guid Control Dyn 
15(4):976–984. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​2​5​1​4​/​3​.​2​0​9​3​2
10.	 Di F, Mattei M (2016) Modeling and incremental nonlinear 
dynamic inversion control of a novel unmanned tiltrotor. J Aircr 
53(1):73–86. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​2​5​1​4​/​1​.​c​0​3​3​1​8​3
11. Safwat E, Zhang W-G, Mohsen A (2019) Design and analysis of a 
robust UAV flight guidance and control system based on a modi­
fied nonlinear dynamic inversion. Appl Sci 9(17):3600. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​
i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​3​3​9​0​/​a​p​p​9​1​7​3​6​0​0
12. Slotine J-JE, Li W (1991) Applied nonlinear control. Prentice 
Hall, Massachusetts
1 3
