# s42835-025-02404-1.pdf

## Page 1

ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Journal of Electrical Engineering & Technology (2026) 21:885–898
https://doi.org/10.1007/s42835-025-02404-1
and landing, simple structure, lightweight, low manufactur­
ing cost, and hovering ability [5].
For a quadrotor UAV system, tracking control design 
is one of the key issues. However, the problem of control 
design encounters some challenges due to the high nonlin­
ear and strong coupling. Moreover, the quadrotor system is 
an underactuated system, as it has six degrees of freedom 
(DoF) but only four independent inputs, which are regulated 
by adjusting the speeds of its four actuators. Furthermore, 
external disturbances and model uncertainties should be 
considered during flight, providing more practical value in 
combat applications. To address these problems, numerous 
control strategies have been proposed, such as backstepping 
control [6], sliding mode control (SMC) [7], active distur­
bance rejection control (ADRC) [8], fuzzy logic control 
(FL) [9], and neural network (NN)-based control [10]. For 
a review of the literature, although these nonlinear control 
approaches achieve successful tracking performance and 
guarantee the stability of the closed-loop quadrotor system 
based on the Lyapunov stability theory. However, the prob­
lem of optimal tracking control was not discussed, result­
ing in unnecessary energy loss. Due to the limited battery 
1  Introduction
In recent years, unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) have 
received a lot of attention from academic and industrial 
fields due to their wide applications, such as environmental 
mapping [1], logistics delivery [2], search and rescue opera­
tions [3], military surveillance [4], and some other applica­
tions. In practice, quadrotor UAVs are the most popular due 
to many significant advantages, including vertical take-off 
	
 Gia Khiem Dinh
khiemdg02@gmail.com
Ngoc Trung Dang
trungcsktd@tnut.edu.vn
Quynh Nga Duong
duongquynhngaktd@tnut.edu.vn
1	
Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Thai Nguyen University of 
Technology, Thai Nguyen, Viet Nam
2	
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Hanoi 
University of Science and Technology, Hanoi, Vietnam
Abstract
This work is an investment in addressing the optimal trajectory tracking control problem for a quadrotor unmanned aerial 
vehicle (UAV) subjected to external disturbance. The proposed method is a combination of an Adaptive Dynamic Pro­
gramming (ADP)-based controller and a nonlinear disturbance observer (NDO), ensuring the stability of the closed-loop 
quadrotor under the influence of unknown external disturbance and achieving near-optimal trajectory tracking control. 
Firstly, the tracking error dynamics are established by utilizing the feedforward terms to compensate for the known 
time-varying error information in the quadrotor dynamics. Then, a nonlinear disturbance observer (NDO) is designed to 
compensate for unknown external disturbances. By eliminating the influence of external disturbances and time-varying 
dynamics in the quadrotor system, the error model of the quadrotor is transferred to the nominal model. A critic-only 
learning structure is applied for both position and attitude controllers to learn the optimal feedback control policy. Finally, 
a flight simulation is given to illustrate the superior efficiency of the proposed control scheme. The simulation result 
shows that the proposed method lies in its ability to compute a smooth optimal control policy even under the influence 
of disturbances, while effectively mitigating the chattering effect.
Keywords  Quadrotor · Adaptive dynamic programming · Critic-only learning · Disturbance observer
Received: 10 April 2025 / Revised: 30 July 2025 / Accepted: 10 August 2025 / Published online: 19 August 2025
© The Author(s) under exclusive licence to The Korean Institute of Electrical Engineers 2025
Disturbance Observer-Based On-Policy Adaptive Dynamic 
Programming for a Quadrotor UAV with External Disturbance
Ngoc Trung Dang1 · Quynh Nga Duong1 · Gia Khiem Dinh2
1 3

## Page 2

Journal of Electrical Engineering & Technology (2026) 21:885–898
capacity of quadrotor UAVs, optimal tracking control has 
been used to overcome this limitation and improve their per­
formance and efficiency.
In the control systems engineering community, opti­
mal control has always attracted significant attention and 
remains a highly influential research topic [11–13]. Theo­
retically, the optimal control problem typically involves 
solving the Algebraic Riccati Equation (ARE) for linear 
systems [14] and the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) equa­
tion for nonlinear systems [15]. However, it is more diffi­
cult or impossible to find the optimal solution of the HJB 
equation for highly nonlinear systems such as quadrotor 
UAVs using only mathematical analysis [16]. To overcome 
this challenge, in recent years, reinforcement learning (RL)-
based control approaches have provided more considerable 
advantages to solve optimal control problems, which find 
the optimal solution without directly solving the HJB equa­
tion. The adaptive dynamic programming (ADP) technique 
is a class of RL that serves as a bridge between traditional 
optimal control methods and adaptive control algorithms. 
To the best of our knowledge, ADP techniques utilize neu­
ral networks (NNs) as a feasible approach. The traditional 
ADP structure is the actor-critic (AC) structure, which was 
developed by Lewis et al. for nonlinear systems to solve 
optimal regulation control [17] and optimal tracking con­
trol [18]. According to a predefined cost function, the critic 
NN is employed to approximate the cost function, while the 
actor NN is employed to approximate an improving con­
trol policy. However, training two NNs typically requires 
significant computational resources, making it challeng­
ing to implement the algorithm in practical applications. 
To overcome this limitation, Ouyang et al. [19] developed 
a critic-only learning structure that was superior to the AC 
structure in computation reduction when using only a NN. 
For both learning structures, a necessary condition called 
persistent excitation (PE) condition must be satisfied to 
guarantee the existence of weight update laws for NNs. 
However, the ADP technique performs poorly in handling 
external time-varying disturbances, thus failing to meet the 
performance requirements of disturbance attenuation when 
quadrotor UAVs fly in complex environments. As a result, 
this indicates that the high-quality control performance of 
practical quadrotor systems cannot be achieved only by the 
ADP technique.
The quadrotor UAV usually suffers the influence of 
unknown external disturbances from aerospace effects, 
including aerodynamic drag and lift forces, as well as 
friction forces [20]. As mentioned earlier, the ADP-based 
control is not able to deal with time-varying external distur­
bances. Therefore, it usually requires rejecting the influence 
of external disturbance before implementing the ADP algo­
rithm. The SMC can effectively robustly respond to external 
disturbances that satisfy bounded conditions. Zhao et al. 
[21] developed an SMC-based ADP controller to obtain 
approximate optimal control for a class of uncertain non­
linear systems. However, as a common problem with SMC 
methods, chattering reduction must be considered. In con­
trast, the disturbance observer (DO) method is considered to 
estimate and compensate for unknown external disturbances 
[22]. Under the assumption of a small-bounded disturbance 
change rate, the estimated disturbance error converges to 
a small-bounded neighborhood of zero and is set to zero. 
Duo et al. [23] introduced a robust controller constructed 
by an ADP controller and an adaptive disturbance observer 
(ADO). There, an ADO is employed to estimate the external 
disturbance with an unknown upper bound, and the ADP-
based controller is utilized to drive the tracking errors of 
the quadrotor UAV to zero. However, the problem of con­
sidering the position and attitude dynamics as a nominal 
linear model subject to disturbance may result in a large 
upper-bounded disturbance, leading to significant estima­
tion errors.
Inspired by previous works [23] and these previous dis­
cussions, this paper proposes an ADP-based DO control­
ler for the nonlinear quadrotor UAV subjected to unknown 
external time-varying disturbances. The main contribution 
is listed as follows:
1.	 Compared to [23], the approach implements the ADP-
based control for the quadrotor system to simplify the 
quadrotor dynamics as a nominal linear system sub­
jected to disturbance. The proposed ADP-based control 
adopts a non-linear quadrotor dynamic model to learn 
the near-optimal solution.
2.	 The NDO is designed to eliminate the influence of 
unknown external time-varying disturbances in the 
quadrotor dynamics. Under the assumption of a small 
disturbance change rate, the external disturbance can 
be estimated and compensated accurately, and the esti­
mated disturbance error converges to a small bounded 
neighborhood of zero and is set to zero.
3.	 The updated NN weight for critic-only learning is 
designed to learn the near-optimal solution online. The 
proposed ADP-based NDO controller achieves approx­
imate optimal trajectory tracking and guarantees the 
stability of the quadrotor system under the influence of 
external disturbances.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Sect. 2, 
the mathematical model and model transformation of the 
quadrotor are presented. Section 3 introduces the ADP-
based NDO algorithm. Section 4, the simulation results and 
analysis are provided. Finally, Sect. 5 concludes this paper
1 3
886

## Page 3

Journal of Electrical Engineering & Technology (2026) 21:885–898
Notation: Let In ∈Rn×n be the identity matrix, 
0n×m ∈Rn×m be a zero matrix, and ci,j ∈Ri×1 be a vec­
tor with 1 in the element jth and 0 otherwise.
2  Quadrotor System
2.1  Mathematical Model
The quadrotor system is an underactuated system with six 
degrees of freedom (DoF) but only four independent con­
trol inputs provided by its four rotors. Define the Earth-
fixed frame E = {xeyeze} and the body-fixed frame 
B = {xbybzb} as shown in Fig. 1.
Let’s define p = [x, y, z]T ∈R3 as the position of 
the quadrotor mass center in the Earth-fixed frame and 
η = [ϕ, θ, ψ]T ∈R3 as Euler angles, where ϕ, θ, and ψ 
represent the roll, pitch, and yaw angles, respectively. The 
roll and pitch angles are bounded satisfying |ϕ| ≤π/2 
and |θ| ≤π/2 to avoid singularity issues in Euler angles. 
The rotation matrix which transfers the coordinates of the 
quadrotor from the body-fixed frame to the Earth-fixed 
frame can be obtained as. 
Rt(η) =
[cψcθ
cψsθsϕ −sψcϕ
cψsθcϕ + sψsϕ
sψcθ
sψsθsϕ + cψcϕ
sψsθcϕ −cψsϕ
−sθ
cθsϕ
cθcϕ
]

(1)
where sα and cα with α = ϕ, θ, ψ represent sin(α) and 
cos(α) functions, respectively. Define the command control 
inputs uz and uη = [uϕ, uθ, uψ]T  as 
uz = kz
4
∑
i=1
Ω2
i ,
uϕ = lkz(Ω2
2 −Ω2
4),
uθ = lkz(Ω2
1 −Ω2
3)
uψ = kτ
4
∑
i=1
(−1)i+1Ω2
i

(2)
in where Ωi is the speed of the ith rotor, l is the distance from 
the quadrotor mass center to rotors, kz is the thrust coeffi­
cient, and kτ is the drag coefficient. As described in [24, 25], 
the dynamics of a quadrotor consist of two interconnected 
systems: position and attitude dynamics, which are coupled 
through the rotation matrix as 
m¨p = −mgc3,3 + Rt(η)uzc3,3 + dp
J ¨η = C(η, ˙η) ˙η + uη + dη

(3)
where m is the mass of the quadrotor, g is the gravita­
tional acceleration, and J = diag([Jx, Jy, Jz]) ∈R3×3 
Fig. 1  The quadrotor coordinate 
frame
 
1 3
887

## Page 4

Journal of Electrical Engineering & Technology (2026) 21:885–898
2.2  Model Transformation
To address the underactuated system, a hierarchical control 
structure consisting of a position controller and an attitude 
controller is proposed as shown in Fig. 2, and a virtual posi­
tion control input up = [up,x, up,y, up,z]T  is defined as 
follows 
up,x = uz
(
cψsθcϕ + sψsϕ
)
up,y = uz
(
sψsθcϕ −cψsϕ
)
up,z = uzcϕcθ

(7)
Similar to [27], once the virtual position control input is 
determined, the desired Euler angles ηd = [ϕd, θd, ψd]T  can 
be obtained by setting the desired yaw angles ψd to constant. 
uz =
√
u2p,x + u2p,y + u2p,z
ϕd = arcsin
(up,x sin ψd −up,y cos ψd
uz
)
θd = arctan
(up,x cos ψd + up,y sin ψd
up,z
)

(8)
Let the desired references for position and attitude subsystems 
as pd = [xd, yd, zd]T ∈R3 and ηd = [ϕd, θd, ψd]T ∈R3. 
To design the trajectory tracking controller for the quadro­
tor, the position and attitude tracking errors are defined as 
{
ep1
= p −pd = [ex, ey, ez]T
ep2
= ˙p −˙pd = [ ˙ex, ˙ey, ˙ez]T
{
eη1
= η −ηd = [eϕ, eθ, eψ]T
eη2
= ˙η −˙ηd = [ ˙eϕ, ˙eθ, ˙eψ]T

(9)
Hence, the position and attitude error subsystems are estab­
lished as follows 
{
˙ep1
= ep2
˙ep2
= −gc3,3 + m−1up + m−1dp −¨pd 
(10)
is 
the 
inertia 
matrix. 
dp = [dx, dy, dz]T ∈R3 
and 
dη = [dϕ, dθ, dψ]T ∈R3 are external disturbance. Accord­
ing to [26], the Coriolis term C(η, ˙η) ∈R3×3 is described 
as 
C(η, ˙η) =
[c11
c12
c13
c21
c22
c23
c31
c32
c33
]

(4)
where 
c11 =0
c12 =(Jy −Jz)( ˙θcϕsϕ + ˙ψs2
ϕcθ) −Jx ˙ψcθ
+ (Jz −Jy) ˙ψc2
ϕcθ
c13 =(Jz −Jy) ˙ψcϕsϕc2
θ
c21 =(Jz −Jy)( ˙θcϕsϕ + ˙ψs2
ϕcθ) + Jx ˙ψcθ
+ (Jy −Jz) ˙ψc2
ϕcθ
c22 =(Jz −Jy) ˙ϕcϕsϕ
c23 = −Jx ˙ψsθcθ + Jz ˙ψc2
ϕcθsθ + Jy ˙ψs2
θcθsθ
c31 =(Jy −Jz) ˙ψc2
θcϕsϕ −Jx ˙θcθ
c32 =(Jz −Jy)( ˙θcϕsϕsθ + ˙ϕs2
ϕcθ) + (Jy −Jz) ˙ϕc2
ϕcθ
+ Jx ˙ψsθcθ −Jy ˙ψs2
ϕcθsθ −Jz ˙ψc2
ϕcθsθ
c33 = −Jz ˙θc2
ϕsθcθ −Jy ˙θs2
ϕcθsθ + Jx ˙θsθcθ
+ (Jy −Jz) ˙ϕcϕsϕc2
θ

(5)
Remark 1  It is easy to observe that the dynamic model of 
the quadrotor system subjected to external disturbance is 
strong coupling and underactuated via the rotation matrix 
due to six degrees of freedom (DoF) and only four indepen­
dent inputs.
Assumption 1  Due to the bound of physical condition, the 
external disturbances and their derivatives are assumed to 
be bounded as 
||dp|| ≤Dp1,
||dη|| ≤Dη1
|| ˙dp|| ≤Dp2,
|| ˙dη|| ≤Dη2

(6)
Fig. 2  The hierarchical control structure of 
the quadrotor
 
1 3
888

## Page 5

Journal of Electrical Engineering & Technology (2026) 21:885–898
main objective of this paper is transferred to finding the 
optimal feedback control laws uo
p and uo
η to guarantee the 
stability of the subsystems (16) and achieve the optimal tra­
jectory tracking through the performance index in (13).
3  Main Results
3.1  Disturbance Observer Design
For the subsystems (16), a nonlinear disturbance observer 
is proposed to estimate disturbances ∆i in the position and 
attitude subsystems. 
ˆ∆i = xi + ri(ei2)
˙xi = −∂ri(zi)
∂zi
(
xi + ri(ei2) + fi + giuo
i
)
(18)
where xi ∈R3 is the internal states of the nonlinear distur­
bance observer, ˆ∆i is the estimated disturbance of ∆i, and 
ri(ei2) is a nonlinear vector-valued function.
Assumption 2  The disturbances in the position and attitude 
subsystems are assumed to be unknown and slowly time-
varying. It means that the derivative of disturbances Dp2 
and Dη2 are small.
Theorem 1  For the system (12) and the nonlinear distur­
bance observer in (18), the disturbance estimation error 
˜∆i = ∆i −ˆ∆i is ultimately uniformly bounded (UUB) 
stable.
Proof Choosing the Lyapunov function as 
L1i = 1
2
˜∆T
i ˜∆i
(19)
Taking the time derivative of Vi along the trajectory (12) as 
˙L1i = ˜∆T
i ˙˜∆i
= −˜∆T
i
(
˙xi + ˙ri(ei2)
)
+ ˜∆T
i ˙∆i
≤−˜∆T
i
(
−∂ri(ei2)
∂ei2
(
xi + ri(ei2) + fi + giuo
i
)
+ ∂ri(ei2)
∂ei2
˙ei2
)
+ 1
2
˜∆T
i ˜∆i + 1
2
˙∆T
i ˙∆i
= −˜∆T
i
(
−∂ri(ei2)
∂ei2
(
ˆ∆i + fi + giuo
i
)
+ 1
2
˜∆T
i ˜∆i
+ ∂ri(ei2)
∂ei2
(
fi + giuo
i + ∆i
))
+ 1
2
˙∆T
i ˙∆i
≤−˜∆T
i
(∂ri(ei2)
∂ei2
−1
2
)
˜∆i + 1
2
˙∆T
i ˙∆i

(20)
{
˙eη1
= eη2
˙eη2
= J−1C(η, ˙η) ˙η + J−1uη + J−1dη −¨ηd 
(11)
The position and attitude control inputs are divided into two 
parts as 
up = uo
p + uf
p
uη = uo
η + uf
η

(12)
The 
feedforward 
terms 
uf
p = mgc3,3 + m¨pd 
and 
uf
η = C(η, ˙η) ˙ηd + J ¨ηd is designed to compensate for time-
varying known information of the desired reference and 
guarantees perfect tracking. Meanwhile, the feedback terms 
uo
p and uo
η are designed to guarantee the stability of the posi­
tion and attitude error dynamics (10) & (11) in an optimal 
manner by minimizing the performance index 
Vi =
∫∞
t
(zT
i Qizi + [uo
i ]T Riuo
i )dτ
(13)
where zi = [eT
i1, eT
i2]T ∈R6, and Qi ∈R6×6 and Ri ∈R3×3 
are positive define matrices with i = p, η. By solving the 
HJB equation respected to the performance index (13), the 
optimal feedback terms uo,∗
p  and uo,∗
η  can be obtained.
Applying the control input laws (12) to the position and atti­
tude error dynamics in (10) & (11), the errors dynamics can 
be obtained as 
{˙ep1
= ep2
˙ep2
= m−1uo
p + m−1dp 
(14)
{˙eη1
= eη2
˙eη2
= J−1C(η, ˙η)eη2 + J−1uo
η + J−1dη 
(15)
For simplification, error dynamic subsystems (14) & (15) 
can be rewritten as a common form as 
˙ei1 = ei2
˙ei2 = fi(ei1, ei2) + giuo
i + ∆i
(16)
The function fi(ei1, ei1), gi, and ∆i represent 
fp(ep1, ep2) = 03×1
fη(eη1, eη2) = J−1C(η, ˙η)eη2
gp = m−1I3
gη = J−1I3
∆p = m−1dp
∆η = J−1dη

(17)
It is noted that the control matrices gi with i = p, η are con­
stant matrices. By compensating for disturbances ∆i, the 
1 3
889

## Page 6

Journal of Electrical Engineering & Technology (2026) 21:885–898
V ∗
i (zi) = min
uo
i
∫∞
t
ri
(
zi, uo
i
)
dτ
(27)
Under the optimality condition ∂Hi(zi, uo
i , ∇V ∗
i )/∂zi = 0, 
the optimal control policy uo,∗
i
 can be derived as follows 
uo,∗
i
= −1
2R−1
i GT
i ∇V ∗
i (zi)
(28)
Substituting uo,∗
i
 into (26), the HJB equation can be rewrit­
ten as 
H∗
i (zi, uo,∗
i
, ∇V ∗
i ) =zT
i Qizi + [∇V ∗
i ]T Fi(zi)
−1
4[∇V ∗
i ]T GiR−1
i GT
i ∇V ∗
i = 0
(29)
It is widely acknowledged that it is impossible to analyti­
cally solve the HJB equation for nonlinear systems. There­
fore, this paper proposes a critic-only design to achieve 
near-optimal control, where the Neural Network (NN) is 
utilized to approximate the performance index as 
V ∗
i (zi) = W T
i φi(zi) + εi(zi)
(30)
where Wi = [Wi1, ..., Wili]T ∈Rli is the ideal critic 
weight, li as the number of neurons in the hidden 
layer, 
φi(zi) = [φi1(zi), ...,φili(zi)]T : R6 →Rli 
is 
the action function satisfying φi(06×1) = 0l1×1 and 
∇φi(06×1) = 0l1×1, and εi(zi) is the reconstruction error.
Assumption 3  The ideal critic weight Wi and the recon­
struction error εi(zi) are assumed to be bounded satisfying 
||Wi|| ≤¯Wi and ||εi(zi)|| ≤¯εi with ¯Wi and ¯εi are positive 
contacts. Additionally, the gradient of the reconstruction 
error respected to zi satisfies ||∇εi(zi)|| ≤∇¯εi with ∇¯εi is 
a positive constant.
Thus, the optimal feedback control input can be rewrit­
ten as 
uo,∗
i
= −1
2R−1
i GT
i
(
∇φi(zi)T Wi + ∇εi(zi)
)

(31)
where ∇φi(zi) = ∂φi(zi)/∂zi. It is important to clarify 
the approximation error for the HJB Eq. (29) with the 
function approximation (30) 
Hi(zi, Wi) =zT
i Qizi + W T
i ∇φiFi
−1
4W T
i ∇φiGiR−1
i GT
i ∇φT
i Wi = ϵr,i

(32)
Let Λi = ∂ri(ei2)/∂ei2 and ϵi = 0.5 ˙∆T
i ˙∆i. Hence, we 
obtain 
˙L1i ≤−2
(
λmin(Λi) −0.5
)
L1i + ϵi
(21)
where λmin(Λi) is the minimum eigenvalue of Λi. Because 
gi is bounded, |gi| ≤¯gi, the positive part ϵi is also bounded 
as 
ϵi ≤0.5DT
2i¯gT
i ¯giD2i
(22)
By choosing Λi as a positive define matrix satisfying 
λmin(Λi) > 0.5, the estimated disturbance error ˜∆i will 
converge to a neighborhood of zero and be set to zero.
3.2  ADP-Based Control Design
By compensating for disturbances using disturbance 
observer in this previous section, the closed-loop of the 
error position and attitude dynamics can be obtained as 
˙ei1 = ei2
˙ei2 = fi(ei1, ei2) + giuo
i + ˜∆i

(23)
It is noted that the estimated disturbance error ˜∆i will con­
verge to a neighborhood of zero and be set to zero. There­
fore, this session aims to design an ADP-based control policy 
to achieve the optimal feedback terms uo
p and uo
η, which 
is considered by eliminating the uncertain term ˜∆i. Let’s 
define the position and attitude states zi = [zT
i1, zT
i2]T ∈R6 
with i = p, η. The position and attitude subsystems are 
rewritten as 
zi = Fi(zi) + Giuo
i 
(24)
where i = p, η and Fi(zi) = [eT
i2, fi(ei1, ei2)T ]T ∈R6, 
Gi = [03×3, gi]T . Recall the performance index (13) as 
Vi(zi) =
∫∞
t
r(zi, uo
i )dτ
(25)
where r(zi, u0
i ) = zT
i Qizi + [uo
i ]T Riuo
i . In general, the 
optimal feedback control policy uo,∗
i
 for implementing the 
minimization of the performance index Vi(zi) respected to 
the system (24). The Hamilton function is given as 
Hi(zi, uo
i , ∇Vi) = ri
(
zi, uo
i
)
+ [∇V ∗
i ]T (
Fi(zi) + Giuo
i
)

(26)
where ∇Vi is the partial derivative of the discounted per­
formance index Vi(zi) with respect to zi and V ∗
i (zi) is the 
optimal discounted performance index defined as 
1 3
890

## Page 7

Journal of Electrical Engineering & Technology (2026) 21:885–898
EH,i = 1
2e2
H,i
(38)
According to [18], it is noted that the updated weight law by 
only minimizing the HJB error eH,i associated with the HJB 
Eq. (26) can not guarantee the stability of the closed-loop 
system (24). To address this problem, inspired by [19], the 
alternative updated weight law is modified as 
˙ˆWi = Γi1 + Γi2
(39)
with 
Γi1 = −ki1
γi
(1 + γT
i γi)2 eH,i
Γi2 = 1
2ki2ζi∇φi(zi)GiR−1
i GT
i zi

(40)
where ki1 and ki2 are positive constants, and 
ζi =
{
0
if zi
(
F(zi) + Giˆuo
i
)
< 0
1
otherwise

(41)
Based on the updated weight law in (39), the critic estimated 
weight error dynamics is given as 
˙ˆWi = ˙Wi −˙ˆWi = −˙ˆWi
=ki1
γi
(1 + γT
i γi)2 eH,i −1
2ki2ζi∇φi(zi)Ξizi
= −ki1
γi
(1 + γT
i γi)2
(
˜W T
i γi −1
4
˜W T
i Υi ˜Wi −ϵr,i
)
−1
2ki2ζi∇φiΞizi

(42)
where Υi = ∇φiΞi∇φT
i ≥0 with Ξi = GiR−1
i GT
i ≥0 is 
a positive constant.
Remark 3  The first term of the updated weight law Γi1 in 
(39) is designed to minimize the HJB error eH,i respected 
to the objective function EB,i in (38). The second term of 
the updated weight law Γi2 in (39) is designed to ensure the 
stability of the closed-loop system based on the Lyapunov 
stability theory.
Assumption 5  It is assumed that the term γi satisfies the per­
sistence of excitation (PE) condition. There exist constants 
νi1 > 0, νi2 > 0, such that, for all t, 
νi1I ≤
∫t+T
t
γi(τ)γT
i (τ)dτ ≤νi2I
(43)
where ϵhjb,i is the residual error 
ϵr,i = −∇εiFi + 1
2W T
i ∇φiGiR−1
i GT
i ∇εi
+ 1
4∇εT
i GiR−1
i GT
i ∇εi

(33)
Assumption 4  For the system (24), this is assumed that 
there exists ξ(zi) ≥0 such that ||Fi(zi) + Giuo,∗
i
|| ≤ξ(zi) 
with ∀zi. There is a Lyapunov function Ji(zi) sat­
isfying 
Ji(0) = 0 
and 
˙Ji(zi) = ∇J T
i (zi)˙zi
= [∇Ji(zi)]T(Fi(zi) + Giuo,∗
i
) < 0. 
Let 
ξ(zi) = κi||
∇J T
i (zi)||, then ˙Ji(zi) =−∇J T
i (zi)Πi∇J T
i (zi) ≤0 with 
Πi is positive define matrix.
Remark 2  Under the Assumption 4, the residual error ϵr,i 
is also bounded satisfying ||ϵr,i|| ≤¯ϵr,i with ¯ϵr,i is a posi­
tive constant. Furthermore, the residual error ϵr,i uniformly 
converges to zero as the number of neurons in the hidden 
layer li is large enough [17].
 Due to the unknown of the ideal critic weight, the approxi­
mation output of the critic NN is 
ˆVi(zi) = ˆW T
i φi(zi)
(34)
where ˆWi is the current estimated value of the ideal critic 
weight and ˆVi is the estimated value of the performance 
index. Usually, the optimal feedback control policy can also 
be approximated as 
ˆuo
i = −1
2R−1
i GT
i ∇φi(zi)T ˆWi
(35)
Thus, the approximated HJB equation can be derived as 
Hi(zi, ˆWi) =zT
i Qizi + ˆW T
i ∇φiFi
−1
4
ˆW T
i ∇φiGiR−1
i GT
i ∇φT
i ˆWi = eH,i

(36)
where eH,i is the HJB error 
eH,i = −˜W T
i γi(zi, ˆuo
i )
+ 1
4
˜W T
i ∇φiGiR−1
i GT
i ∇φT
i ˜Wi + ϵr,i

(37)
where 
γi(zi, ˆuo
i ) = ∇φ(zi)
(
F(zi) + Giˆuo
i
)
 
and 
˜Wi = Wi −ˆWiis the estimated weight error. When 
ˆWi(t) →Wi, eH,i →ϵr,i. The problem is to find an updated 
weight law to adjust the critic weight so that the HJB error 
eH,i is minimized. Consider the objective function as 
1 3
891

## Page 8

Journal of Electrical Engineering & Technology (2026) 21:885–898
In order to ˙Li2 ≤0m the following conditions should be 
satisfied 
αi > 0
|| ˜W|| >
4
√ςi
αi

(49)
Case 2. ζi = 1 when zT
i
(
F(zi) + Giˆuo
i
)
≥0, then we have 
˙L2i = −ki1
˜W T
i γi
(1 + γT
i γi)2
(
˜W T
i γi −1
4
˜W T
i ΥT
i ˜Wi −ϵr,i
)
−1
2ki2 ˜W T
i ∇φiΞizi + ki2zT
i
(
F(zi) + Giˆuo
i
)
= −ki1
˜W T
i γi
(1 + γT
i γi)2
(
˜W T
i γi −1
4
˜W T
i ΥT
i ˜Wi −ϵr,i
)
+ ki2zi
(
F(zi) + Giuo,∗
i
)
+ 1
2zT
i Ξi∇ϵi

(50)
Under the Assumption 4, we have 
˙L2i ≤−ki2zT
i Πizi −ki1αi|| ˜Wi||4 + ki1ςi
+ 1
2ki2zT
i Ξi∇ϵi
≤−3
4λmin(Πi)||zi||2 −ki1αi|| ˜Wi||4
+ λ2
max(Ξi)
4λmin(Πi)
∇¯ϵi + ki1ςi

(51)
In order to ˙Li2 ≤0m the following conditions should be 
satisfied 
αi > 0
|| ˜W|| >
4
√
ςi
αi
+
λ2max(Ξi)
4ki1αiλmin(Πi)
∇¯ϵi

(52)
As analyzed for both cases, ˙L2i < 0 is guaranteed with the 
conditions in (49) & (52). Based on the Lyapunov stability, 
the tracking error zi and the estimated weight error ˜Wi are 
ultimate uniform bounded (UUB) regardless of whether the 
initial stabilizing control.
4  Simulation Result
In this session, numerous flight simulations were con­
ducted using MATLAB R2022a on a personal laptop 
equipped with an Intel(R) Core(TM) i5-1145G7 CPU, 16 
GB RAM, running Windows 11 64-bit. To demonstrate 
the tracking performance of the proposed control scheme, 
two controllers are considered for the comparison, includ­
ing the controller in [23] and the proposed controller. The 
The PE condition is needed in adaptive control to identify 
the critic weights to approximate the performance index 
Vi(zi).
Theorem 2  Under the Assumption 5, the ADP-based con­
troller with the updated weight law (39) for the system 
(24), ˜Wi and zi are ultimate uniform bounded (UUB). In 
addition the near-optimal control objective is obtained with 
||V ∗
i −ˆVi|| ≤ϵVi and ||uo,∗
i
−ˆuo
i || ≤ϵui.
Proof: Choosing the Lyapunov candidate function as 
L2i = 1
2
˜W T
i ˜Wi + ki2Ji(zi)
(44)
Let Ji(zi) = (1/2)zT
i zi, taking the time derivative of (44) 
as 
˙L2i = ˜W T
i
˙Wi + ki2zT
i ˙zi
= −ki1
˜W T
i γi
(1 + γT
i γi)2
(
˜W T
i γi −1
4
˜W T
i ΥT
i ˜Wi −ϵr,i
)
−1
2ki2ζi ˜W T
i ∇φiΞizi + ki2zT
i
(
F(zi) + Giˆuo
i
)

(45)
Case 1. For ζi = 0 when zT
i
(
F(zi) + Giˆuo
i
)
< 0, then we 
have 
˙L2i < −ki1
˜W T
i γi
(1 + γT
i γi)2
(
˜W T
i γi −1
4
˜W T
i Υi ˜Wi −ϵr,i
)

(46)
Define σi = 1/(1 + γiγT
i ). Then, we have 
˙L2i ≤−ki1σ2
i ( ˜W T
i γi)2 + 1
4ki1σ2
i ( ˜W T
i γi) ˜W T
i Υi ˜Wi
+ ki1σ2
i ( ˜W T
i γi)ϵr,i
≤−ki1σ2
i || ˜W T
i γi||2 + 1
2ki1σ2
i
(
|| ˜W T
i γi||2 + ||ϵr,i||2)
+ 1
8ki1σ2
i λmax(Υi)
(
|| ˜W T
i γi||2 + || ˜Wi||4)
≤−
(1
2 −1
8λmax(Υi)
)
ki1σ2
i || ˜Wi||2||γi||2
+ 1
8ki1σ2
i λmax(Υi)|| ˜Wi||4 + 1
2ki1σ2
i ||ϵr,i||2
≤−ki1αi|| ˜Wi||4 + ki1ςi

(47)
where 
αi =
(1
4 −3
16λmax(Υi)
)
σ2
i
ςi = 1
2σ2
i ||ϵr,i||2 −
(1
4 −1
8λmax(Υi)
)
σ2
i ||γi||4

(48)
1 3
892

## Page 9

Journal of Electrical Engineering & Technology (2026) 21:885–898
position and attitude responses of the quadrotor with 
the proposed controller are shown in Fig. 6. It is clearly 
observed that the quadrotor equipped with the proposed 
controller achieves excellent trajectory tracking perfor­
mance. To further confirm the superior tracking perfor­
mance of the quadrotor under the proposed controller, 
the reference trajectory and the actual flight trajectory 
in three-dimensional space are illustrated in Fig. 7. Fur­
thermore, a comparison of the tracking error convergence 
performance between the proposed controller and the 
controller presented in [23] is provided in Figs. 8 and 9.
To analyze the tracking performance of the quadrotor 
under the different controllers, two performance indices in 
[28] are employed as follows:
	–
Integral of Squared Error (IAE) 
parameter of the quadrotor vehicle is configured as m = 1.7 
(kg), J = diag([4.7, 4.7, 9.8]) × 10−2 (kgm2), g = 9.8 
(m/s2), l = 0.2 (m), and kz = kτ = 1. The initial condi­
tion of the quadrotor is set as p(0) = [−2.0, 0.0, 1.0]T  (m), 
˙p = [0.0, 0.0, 0.0]T  (m/s), η = [0.0, 0.0, 0.0]T  (rad), and 
˙η = [0.0, 0.0, 0.0]T  (rad/s). The desired position trajectory 
is chosen as 
pd = [2.0 sin(0.3t), 2.0 cos(0.3t), 0.5t]T 
(53)
The external disturbances acting on the quadrotor during 
flight are assumed to be 
dp = 0.2
[sin(1.0 + 0.7t) cos(0.5t)
sin(1.7 + 0.8t) cos(0.6t)
sin(0.5 + 0.4t) cos(0.8t)
]
dη = 0.2
[sin(1.1 + 0.2t) cos(0.3t)
sin(1.4 + 0.3t) cos(0.1t)
sin(0.9 + 0.4t) cos(0.1t)
]
(54)
The 
disturbance 
observer 
term 
is 
chosen 
as 
Λp = Λη = 10I3. The optimal term is chosen as Table 1. 
The initial critic weights for position and attitude con­
trollers are chosen as Wp(0) = [5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5]T  
and Wη(0) = [1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1]T . The basic action 
function is chosen as 
φp(zp) = [e2
x, e2
y, e2
z, ˙e2
x, ˙e2
y, ˙e2
z, ex ˙ex, ey ˙ey, ez ˙ez]T
φη(zη) = [e2
ϕ, e2
θ, e2
ψ, ˙e2
ϕ, ˙e2
θ, ˙e2
ψ, eϕ ˙eϕ, eθ ˙eθ, eψ ˙eψ]T 
(55)
To clarify the efficiency of the proposed control scheme, 
the simulation results are provided in Figs. 3, 4, 5, 6 and 
7. The convergence of the disturbance estimation errors 
is shown in Fig. 5. As shown in the figure, the estimated 
errors converge to a small bounded neighborhood of zero 
after 0.1 seconds, reaching values as low as |di| ≤0.01 
and |dj| ≤5 × 10−3 with i = x, y, z and j = ϕ, θ, ψ. 
Thus, external disturbances can be accurately estimated 
by using the nonlinear disturbance observer and subse­
quently compensated within the control loops. The con­
vergence of the critic weights for position and attitude 
controllers is illustrated in Figs. 3 and 4, respectively. 
After 5 seconds, both critic weights converge and remain 
stable under the influence of external disturbance. The 
Table 1  The parameter of the ADP-based controller
Controller
Parameters
Values
Position controller
[Qp, Rp, kp1, kp2]
[5I6, I3, 0.5, 0.2]
Attitude controller
[Qη, Rη, kη1, kη2]
[10I6, I3, 0.5, 0.2]
Fig. 4  The convergence of attitude weights
 
Fig. 3  The convergence of position weights
 
1 3
893

## Page 10

Journal of Electrical Engineering & Technology (2026) 21:885–898
Fig. 6  The position and attitude response of the quadrotor
 
Fig. 5  The disturbance estimation 
errors
 
1 3
894

## Page 11

Journal of Electrical Engineering & Technology (2026) 21:885–898
	
IAE (Integral of Absolute Error) was used to evaluate 
the overall magnitude of the deviation between the sys­
tem output and the desired response.
	–
Integral of Time-weighted Absolute Error (ITAE) 
µp
IT AE =
∫T
0
t
(
|ex(t)| + |ey(t)| + |ez(t)|
)
dt
µη
IT AE =
∫T
0
t
(
|eϕ(t)| + |eθ(t)| + |eψ(t)|
)
dt

(57)
	
ITAE (Integral of Time-weighted Absolute Error) was 
applied to emphasize the impact of errors that persist 
over time, highlighting the system’s ability to quickly 
minimize deviations.
The tracking performance comparisons of the proposed 
controller and the compared controller in shown in Table 2. 
As shown in Figs. 8 and 9 and Table 2, we can see that the 
tracking performance of the proposed method is better than 
the method in [23]. Compared to the method in [23], the 
proposed approach achieves faster tracking error conver­
gence and significantly reduces “chattering” and overshoot. 
µp
IAE =
∫T
0
(
|ex(t)| + |ey(t)| + |ez(t)|
)
dt
µη
IAE =
∫T
0
(
|eϕ(t)| + |eθ(t)| + |eψ(t)|
)
dt

(56)
Fig. 8  The tracking errors of the position loop
 
Fig. 7  The 3D trajectories of quadrotor and references
 
1 3
895

## Page 12

Journal of Electrical Engineering & Technology (2026) 21:885–898
observer. The advantage of this work is to achieve a near-
optimal tracking objective for the quadrotor system under 
the influence of unknown external disturbances through the 
NN-based update law of the online critic. The quadrotor 
system with the proposed controller is ultimately uniformly 
bounded (UUB) stability. A simulation result is provided to 
illustrate the effectiveness of the proposed method. In future 
work, we plan to consider practical constraints such as input 
saturation and state limitations (e.g., roll, pitch, and yaw 
angle bounds), which would further enhance the applicabil­
ity of the proposed control scheme in real-world scenarios.
Acknowledgements  This research was supported by the Research 
Foundation of Thai Nguyen University of Technology.
Funding  This research received no external funding.
Data Availability  The data that supports the findings of this study are 
available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.
Theoretically, the “chattering” issue in the compared con­
trol scheme is caused by using the discontinuous function 
sign(.) in the terminal sliding mode observer. In contrast, 
the superiority of our method lies in its ability to compute 
a smooth optimal control policy even under the influence 
of disturbances, while effectively mitigating the chattering 
effect.
5  Conclusion
This paper invests in designing a robust tracking controller 
for quadrotor UAVs subjected to unknown external distur­
bances. The problem of achieving optimal trajectory tracking 
is not usually discussed in conventional control approaches 
for quadrotor UAVs. To overcome this limitation, this 
work proposes a robust optimal control scheme, consist­
ing of an ADP-based controller and a nonlinear disturbance 
Table 2  The tracking performance comparisons
Controller
µp
IAE
µη
IAE
µp
IT AE
µη
IT AE
Controller in [23]
22.80
2.02
9.98 × 104
5.54 × 103
Proposed controller
15.20 (↓33%)
0.69 (↓66%)
3.11 × 104↓(69%)
1.45 × 103(↓74%)
Fig. 9  The tracking errors of the attitude loop
 
1 3
896

## Page 13

Journal of Electrical Engineering & Technology (2026) 21:885–898
systems with completely unknown dynamics. IET Control The­
ory Appl 10(6):700–710
17.	 Vamvoudakis KG, Lewis FL (2010) Online actor–critic algorithm 
to solve the continuous-time infinite horizon optimal control 
problem. Automatica 46(5):878–888
18.	 Modares H, Lewis FL (2014) Optimal tracking control of nonlin­
ear partially-unknown constrained-input systems using integral 
reinforcement learning. Automatica 50(7):1780–1792
19.	 Ouyang Y, Dong L, Sun C (2020) Critic learning-based control 
for robotic manipulators with prescribed constraints. IEEE Trans 
Cybern 52(4):2274–2283
20.	 Miao H, Song T, Liu J, Ye J (2024) Adaptive disturbance observer-
based fast nonsingular terminal sliding mode control for quadro­
tors. J Franklin Inst 361(14):107092.
21.	 Zhao B, Liu D, Alippi C (2020) Sliding-mode surface-based 
approximate optimal control for uncertain nonlinear systems 
with asymptotically stable critic structure. IEEE Trans Cybern 
51(6):2858–2869
22.	 Chen W-H, Yang J, Guo L, Li S (2015) Disturbance-observer-
based control and related methods—an overview. IEEE Trans Ind 
Electron 63(2):1083–1095
23.	 Dou L, Su X, Zhao X, Zong Q, He L (2021) Robust tracking con­
trol of quadrotor via on-policy adaptive dynamic programming. 
Int J Robust Nonlinear Control 31(7):2509–2525
24.	 Liu H, Ma T, Lewis FL, Wan Y (2018) Robust formation con­
trol for multiple quadrotors with nonlinearities and disturbances. 
IEEE Trans Cybern 50(4):1362–1371
25.	 Liu H, Li B, Xiao B, Ran D, Zhang C (2023) Reinforcement 
learning-based tracking control for a quadrotor unmanned aerial 
vehicle under external disturbances. Int J Robust Nonlinear Con­
trol 33(17):10360–10377
26.	 Liu H, Wang Y, Xi J (2021) Completely distributed formation 
control for networked quadrotors under switching communica­
tion topologies. Syst Control Lett 147:104841.
27.	 Tian M, Wang N, Wang Z, Fu Z, Tao F (2025) Prescribed-time 
fault-tolerant tracking control for quadrotor uav with guaranteed 
performance. Aerosp Sci Technol 110162
28.	 Guo Z, Zhou J, Guo J, Cieslak J, Chang J (2017) Coupling-char­
acterization-based robust attitude control scheme for hypersonic 
vehicles. IEEE Trans Ind Electron 64(8):6350–6361
Publisher’s Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to juris­
dictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds 
exclusive rights to this article under a publishing agreement with the 
author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted 
manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of 
such publishing agreement and applicable law.
Ngoc Trung Dang  He received a 
B.S. degree in Automation Engineer­
ing in 2007 and an M.S. degree in 
Automation Engineering in 2011 
from the Thai Nguyen University of 
Technology, Thai Nguyen, Vietnam. 
Currently, he is the Deputy Head of 
the Faculty of Electrical Engineering 
at Thai Nguyen University of Tech­
nology, Thai Nguyen, Vietnam. His 
research interests include nonlinear 
control and robotics.
Declarations
Ethical Approval  Not applicable.
Competing Interests  The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.
References
1.	
Duan Z, Li Y, Wang J, Zhao G, Svanberg S (2019) Aquatic envi­
ronment monitoring using a drone-based fluorosensor. Appl Phys 
B 125:1–8
2.	
Das DN, Sewani R, Wang J, Tiwari MK (2020) Synchronized 
truck and drone routing in package delivery logistics. IEEE 
Trans Intell Transp Syst On Intelligent Transportation Systems 
22(9):5772–5782
3.	
Cho SW, Park HJ, Lee H, Shim DH, Kim S-Y (2021) Coverage 
path planning for multiple unmanned aerial vehicles in maritime 
search and rescue operations. Comput Ind Eng 161:107612.
4.	
De Moraes RS, De Freitas EP (2019) Multi-uav based 
crowd monitoring system. IEEE Trans Aerosp Electron Syst 
56(2):1332–1345
5.	
Labbadi M, Cherkaoui M (2020) Robust adaptive nonsingu­
lar fast terminal sliding-mode tracking control for an uncertain 
quadrotor uav subjected to disturbances. ISA Trans 99:290–304
6.	
Wen G, Hao W, Feng W, Gao K (2021) Optimized backstep­
ping tracking control using reinforcement learning for quadrotor 
unmanned aerial vehicle system. IEEE Trans On Syst, Man, And 
Cybern: Syst 52(8):5004–5015
7.	
Han G, Mofid O, Mobayen S, Khooban MH (2024) Adaptive 
prescribed performance based on recursive nonsingular termi­
nal sliding mode control for quad-rotor systems under uncer­
tainty and disturbance: real-time validation. Aerosp Sci Technol 
147:109028.
8.	
Yu S, Fan X, Qi J, Wan L, Liu B (2024) Attitude control of 
quadrotor uav based on integral backstepping active disturbance 
rejection control. Trans Inst Meas Control 46(4):703–715
9.	
Wen G, Yu D, Zhao Y (2024) Optimized fuzzy attitude control of 
quadrotor unmanned aerial vehicle using adaptive reinforcement 
learning strategy. In IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Elec­
tronic Systems
10.	 Singha A, Ray AK, Govil MC (2024) Adaptive neural network 
based quadrotor uav formation control under external distur­
bances. Aerosp Sci Technol 155:109608.
11.	 Dao PN, Duc HAN et al. (2024) Nonlinear rise based integral 
reinforcement learning algorithms for perturbed bilateral teleop­
erators with variable time delay. Neurocomputing 128355.
12.	 Dao PN, Duc HAN, Liu Y-C (2025) Reinforcement-learning-
based control framework for leader-following cascade forma­
tion of multiple perturbed surface vehicles. Syst Control Lett 
200:106077.
13.	 Nguyen K, Dang VT, Pham DD, Dao PN (2024) Formation con­
trol scheme with reinforcement learning strategy for a group 
of multiple surface vehicles. Int J Robust Nonlinear Control 
34(3):2252–2279
14.	 Modares H, Lewis FL (2014) Linear quadratic tracking control of 
partially-unknown continuous-time systems using reinforcement 
learning. IEEE Trans Autom Control 59(11):3051–3056
15.	 Liu D, Yang X, Li H (2013) Adaptive optimal control for a class 
of continuous-time affine nonlinear systems with unknown inter­
nal dynamics. Neural Comput Appl 23:1843–1850
16.	 Xiao G, Zhang H, Luo Y, Jiang H (2016) Data-driven optimal 
tracking control for a class of affine non-linear continuous-time 
1 3
897

## Page 14

Journal of Electrical Engineering & Technology (2026) 21:885–898
Gia Khiem Dinh  received a B.S. 
degree in control engineering and 
automation from Hanoi University of 
Science and Technology, Hanoi, Viet­
nam, in 2024. He is currently pursu­
ing an M.S. degree in control 
engineering and automation from 
Hanoi University of Science and 
Technology, Hanoi, Vietnam. His 
research interests include optimal 
control, 
reinforcement 
learning, 
robotics, and autonomous vehicles ​h​t​t​
p​s​:​/​/​s​c​h​o​l​a​r​.​g​o​o​g​l​e​.​c​o​m​/​c​i​t​a​t​i​o​n​s​?​u​s​e​
r​=​y​F​J​f​7​J​o​A​A​A​A​J​&​h​l​=​v​i​&​a​u​t​h​u​s​e​r​=​1​.​
Quynh Nga Duong  received a B.S. 
degree in Automation Engineering in 
2009 and an M.S. degree in Automa­
tion Engineering in 2013 from the 
Thai Nguyen University of Technol­
ogy, Thai Nguyen, Vietnam. Cur­
rently, she is working at the Faculty 
of 
Electrical 
Engineering, 
Thai 
Nguyen University of Technology, 
Thai Nguyen, Vietnam. Her research 
interests include robotics and solar 
energy.
1 3
898
