# sensors-22-05082-v2.pdf

## Page 1

Citation: Thanh, H.L.N.N.; Huynh,
T.T.; Vu, M.T.; Mung, N.X.; Phi, N.N.;
Hong, S.K.; Vu, T.N.L. Quadcopter
UAVs Extended States/Disturbance
Observer-Based Nonlinear Robust
Backstepping Control. Sensors 2022,
22, 5082. https://doi.org/
10.3390/s22145082
Academic Editor: Carmine Serio
Received: 26 May 2022
Accepted: 29 June 2022
Published: 6 July 2022
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright:
© 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed
under
the
terms
and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
sensors
Article
Quadcopter UAVs Extended States/Disturbance Observer-Based
Nonlinear Robust Backstepping Control
Ha Le Nhu Ngoc Thanh 1
, Tuan Tu Huynh 2, Mai The Vu 3
, Nguyen Xuan Mung 4
, Nguyen Ngoc Phi 4
,
Sung Kyung Hong 4,5,* and Truong Nguyen Luan Vu 6
1
Department of Mechatronics Engineering, Ho Chi Minh City University of Technology and
Education (HCMUTE), Ho Chi Minh City 71307, Vietnam; thanh.hlnn@hcmute.edu.vn
2
Faculty of Mechatronics and Electronics, Lac Hong University, Bien Hoa 810000, Vietnam;
huynhtuantu@lhu.edu.vn
3
School of Intelligent Mechatronics Engineering, Sejong University, Seoul 05006, Korea;
maithevu90@sejong.ac.kr
4
Faculty of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Sejong University, Seoul 05006, Korea;
xuanmung@sejong.ac.kr (N.X.M.); npnguyen@sejong.ac.kr (N.N.P.)
5
Department of Convergence Engineering for Intelligent Drone, Sejong University, Seoul 05006, Korea
6
Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, Ho Chi Minh City University of Technology and Education (HCMUTE),
Ho Chi Minh City 71307, Vietnam; vuluantn@hcmute.edu.vn
*
Correspondence: skhong@sejong.ac.kr
Abstract: A trajectory tracking control for quadcopter unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) based on
a nonlinear robust backstepping algorithm and extended state/disturbance observer (ESDO) is
presented in this paper. To obtain robust attitude stabilization and superior performance of three-
dimension position tracking control, the construction of the proposed algorithm can be separated into
three parts. First, a mathematical model of UAV negatively inﬂuenced by exogenous disturbances is
established. Following, an extended state/disturbance observer using a general second-order model
is designed to approximate undesirable inﬂuences of perturbations on the UAVs dynamics. Finally, a
nonlinear robust controller is constructed by an integration of the nominal backstepping technique
with ESDO to enhance the performance of attitude and position control mode. Robust stability of the
closed-loop disturbed system is obtained and guaranteed through the Lyapunov theorem without
precise knowledge of the upper bound condition of perturbations. Lastly, a numerical simulation is
carried out and compared with other previous controllers to demonstrate the great advantage and
effectiveness of the proposed control method.
Keywords: trajectory tracking; extended state observer; disturbance observer; backstepping control;
quadcopter UAV
1. Introduction
The unmanned aerial vehicles also known as drones are a great achievement of
science and technology. They are widely used in various ﬁelds of interest from academic
research to industrial applications. Thus, there are an increasing number of scientiﬁc
studies to expand the range of activities and enhance the operating capacity of these
vehicles to reach their limit. The majority of this research has signiﬁcantly been achieved
in several major areas, such as a reliable controller construction [1], innovative airframe
optimization design [2], efﬁcient communication [3], and energy management for UAVs [4].
Nevertheless, there always exist many further challenges to construct an efﬁcient ﬂight
controller to guarantee rigorous stability and rapid adaptation of the vehicle’s behavior in
various ﬂight environments due to different causes, such as: (i) The quadcopter UAV suffers
from the intrinsic characteristic of an under-actuated system, meaning that the vehicle
has less actuator control input than the number of degrees of freedom (DOF), which must
be controlled. In addition, the various sources of parametric uncertainties and actuator
Sensors 2022, 22, 5082. https://doi.org/10.3390/s22145082
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sensors

## Page 2

Sensors 2022, 22, 5082
2 of 20
failure are also considered as an essential characteristic needing to be handled; (ii) UAVs
are also known as complex systems with an extremely nonlinear characteristic, open-loop
instability, and strong coupled system with multiple input and multiple output (MIMO)
variables in which the interaction between the rotational and translational dynamic model
is highly complicated; (iii) The operational principle of multi-copter UAVs is based on the
aerodynamic force generated by the spinning of multi-rotors and propellers. Thus, the
vehicle is extremely sensitive to any interference of external disturbances, particularly gusts
of wind.
To overcome the control challenge, a variety of works to improve the control perfor-
mance of quadcopter UAVs have been conducted in recent decades. Many traditional linear
control techniques have been introduced by using the Proportional Integral Derivative
(PID) control law [5] and the Linear Quadratic Regulator (LQR) algorithm [6]. Although
the PID and LQR can manage the hovering behavior of the vehicle and handle some simple
actions, strict stability of the control system cannot be guaranteed in the presence of un-
certainties and/or external perturbations. Furthermore, to design these linear controllers,
a linearization process needs to be carried out surrounding single or multiple operating
points. Thus, these methods still face the disadvantage of breaking down performance
once the vehicle diverges from the considered points.
To attenuate the undesirable effects of nonlinearity parts and uncertainties/disturbances
generated from various sources, plentiful control techniques have been introduced, such
as a nonlinear control method presented in [7,8], whereby the controller guarantees a null
tracking error and robust stability of the vehicle in the appearance of perturbations. In [9],
an adaptive controller for trajectory tracking of UAVs is introduced by using an accurate
parameterization algorithm. In [10], a nonlinear controller for the attitude and position
tracking control of quadcopter UAVs is introduced by integration between a command-
ﬁltered backstepping algorithm and the gain scheduled method. In [11,12], a combination
of model predictive algorithm and robust control (H∞) is conducted for trajectory tracking
and attitude stabilization of a quadcopter UAV to obtain a null steady-state error under
the effect of disturbances. However, in all these controller methods, the nominal control
performance needs to be sacriﬁced to handle the stabilization of the control system in the
presence of multiple uncertainties and/or disturbance sources.
With a simple procedure of construction and strict robustness to counteract uncertain-
ties/disturbances, the sliding mode control (SMC) and extended SMC have been largely
developed in the UAV control system, such as second-order sliding mode control [13–16],
backstepping and integral SMC [17,18], and adaptive SMC [19,20]. It is well-known as
a robust control in the SMC community, the nonsingular terminal SMC (NSTSMC) is an
interesting technique [21], because the algorithm ensures both ﬁnite-time stability of sliding
surface and the convergence of system states to desired trajectories. Motivated by the
nonsingular terminal SMC and a nonlinear disturbance observer-based control [22,23],
a composite control algorithm [24] is presented by an integration of the single hidden layer
feedforward network and an NSTSMC to ensure the zero convergence of tracking error
in a ﬁnite-time. In [25], another research based on a ﬁnite-time disturbance observer and
NSTSMC is also developed to enhance the tracking control. However, these controller
algorithms are only suitable for simple desired trajectories because several assumptions of
these methods may not be practical in some cases. In [26], the concept of a virtual control
variable is used to restructure the underactuated UAV system to obtain a fully-actuated
model. Afterward, an advanced SMC is designed to enhance the control performance
of the attitude and position subsystem. However, to reduce an inherent chattering effect
in the SMC technique, the high gain parameters of the switching law must be avoided.
Thus, this controller cannot strictly guarantee both precise tracking control and a strong
anti-chattering effect.
The backstepping control technique and its extended methods are known as efﬁcient
recursive nonlinear control algorithms for a particular class of engineering system in which
the controller is constructed from plentiful subsystem models. The process of designing a

## Page 3

Sensors 2022, 22, 5082
3 of 20
backstepping algorithm is to start from the origin of a complex system based on the form of
state feedback, and substitute to the next step of the procedure. In this process, auxiliary
variables and virtual control inputs are proposed to achieve the stable performance of each
subsystem gradually. The process of backing out and substituting is terminated once an
ultimate law is obtained [27–29]. Due to the advantage of the recursive structure, the back-
stepping method is renowned for its efﬁciency in the group of robust control techniques
for complex engineering models, especially for unmanned aerial vehicles. Although there
are many previous works that have solved the tracking control problem in both attitude
stabilization and position control [30–32], the control performance is also ruined in the
various working situations because it is not easy to estimate the variation in the uncertain-
ties, exogenous perturbations, and actuator faults. To deal with this problem, the other
extended backstepping controllers using disturbance observer and fault-estimation are
employed [33–36]. In [37], an extended state observer is designed for online approximation
in both the unknown velocity states and the perturbations affecting subsystem dynamics.
Following, the dynamic surface controller is presented by using the estimated values to
ensure the convergence of the tracking error to zero. However, in this research, the distur-
bance observer is constructed by using UAV position states computed by an integration
of the velocity feedback. Obviously, these position states are not accurate in long-term
operation because the accumulated error is always progressive during the integration
process. Furthermore, the upper bound knowledge of uncertainties and/or exogenous
perturbations is required for the observer design step. In [38], an active disturbance re-
jection control (ADRC) is introduced by using an auxiliary variable and cascade control
method to ameliorate the robustness and anti-perturbation of the UAV control system.
However, the drawback of ADRC is to cover some indeterminate coefﬁcients consisting of
tracking differentiators. Furthermore, the conﬂict between these parameters may occur in
the controller tuning process.
The inspiration of this study is to deal with the aforementioned drawbacks of the existing
research. A nonlinear robust backstepping control based on an extended state/disturbance
observer (RBCESDO) for attitude stabilization and trajectory tracking control is presented to
improve the performance of quadcopter UAVs under the various inﬂuences of uncertainties
and/or external disturbances. In this method, the auxiliary variables, virtual controls, and
ultimate control law are recursively constructed by using the approximated values of the
system states and disturbances given by the ESDO. The contribution of this study can be
stated as follows:
(i)
The proposed algorithm overcomes the drawbacks of previous methods in the require-
ment of full state measurement. The ESDO is able to estimate the velocity state of the
vehicle once this parameter cannot be directly measured. Thus, the implementation
cost for data acquisition may be reduced and the inﬂuence of high measurement noise
generated from the velocity sensor is also alleviated.
(ii)
The unmeasured velocity states and lumped perturbations are estimated by the
presented ESDO integrating with advantages of the recursive structure of the back-
stepping technique, the convergence of tracking errors is always guaranteed.
(iii)
The numerical simulation is fully executed in both attitude and position control
mode; these performance results are compared with other existing control methods to
conﬁrm the strict stability and efﬁciency of the presented control scheme in both the
convergence error and anti-disturbance capacity.
(iv)
Finally, unlike the existing methods, the upper bounds of the uncertainties and/or
external disturbances are not demanded during the steps of designing the proposed
control scheme.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows. The mathematical model of a
quadcopter UAV and problem description is presented in Section 2. In Section 3, the steps
of constructing a nonlinear robust backstepping controller based on ESDO and stability
analysis are derived. A numerical simulation conducted and compared with other existing

## Page 4

Sensors 2022, 22, 5082
4 of 20
methods is given in Section 4. Final statements of this study are given in Section 5 through
some conclusions.
2. Mathematical Model and Problem Description
In this section, the mathematical model of a quadcopter UAV is constructed in the
presence of external disturbances:
There are some assumptions are given as follows:
Hypothesis 1. The structure of a quadcopter UAV is considered as a rigid body.
Hypothesis 2. The coefﬁcients of four rotors and parameters of propellers are identical.
The quadcopter UAV can be considered as a 6-DOFs rigid body, which is an idealized
expression of invariable volume. Thus, the behavior of the quadcopter (i.e., rotational
motion and translational motion) can be described through the movement of a particle
positioned in the UAV center of mass. Obviously, a dynamic model of the vehicle entirely
depends on aerodynamic force and torque generated by the speed of propellers mounted
on four rotors. Thus, it is necessary to consider that the properties of four rotors and
propellers are identical to facilitate the formulation of a mathematical model. Through
two essential coordinate frames, i.e., Earth frame {E}, and body frame {B} (as shown in
Figure 1), the dynamical model of a quadcopter UAV can be described from two subsystems
of translational motion (Q) and rotational motion (Θ) by using the Newton–Euler formula
as follows:











(Q)
Translation
:
(
.
Q = Υ
m
.
Υ = −G + TE
B(Θ)Faero + Fdis
(Θ)
Rotation
:
(
.
Θ = RE
B(Θ)ϖ
I
.
ϖ = −(ϖ × Iϖ) −Mgyros + Maero + Mdis
(1)
where Q = [x, y, z]T ∈R3 is the absolute position of the quadrotor UAV with respect to
the earth frame {E}; Θ = [φ, θ, ψ]T ∈R3, φ, θ ∈(−π/2, π/2), represent a vector of Euler
angles (i.e., the roll, pitch, and yaw); G = [0, 0, mg]T ∈R3 with m ∈R+ and g = 9.81 m/s2
denote the total mass of the vehicle and gravity acceleration constant, respectively; ϖ ∈R3
is angular velocity; I = diag

Ix, Iy, Iz
 ∈R3×3 denotes the matrix of the inertial moment
along x, y, and z axes; Faero = [0, 0, fz]T ∈R3 and Maero =

τφ, τθ, τψ
T ∈R3 are the vectors
of aerodynamic force and torque generated by multi-rotors and propellers of the vehicle, in
which fz[N] is the thrust force; τφ, τθ, τψ[N.m] represent the roll, pitch, and yaw torques,
respectively. These values can be computed by:




fz
τφ
τθ
τψ



=








4
∑
i=1
Fi
l(F2 −F4)
l(−F1 + F3)
4
∑
i=1
(−1)iMi








=




b
Ω2
1 + Ω2
2 + Ω2
3 + Ω2
4

lb
Ω2
2 −Ω2
4

lb
−Ω2
1 + Ω2
3

d
−Ω2
1 + Ω2
2 −Ω2
3 + Ω2
4





(2)
where Fi = b Ω2
i , and Mi = d Ω2
i ,
i = 1, 2, . . . , 4 represent the aerodynamic force and
torque produced by the rotor and propeller i-th; b, d ∈R+ are thrust and drag coefﬁcients,
respectively; Ωi is the angular velocity of motor i-th; l is the arm length of the vehicle frame.

## Page 5

Sensors 2022, 22, 5082
5 of 20
1F
2
F
3F
4
F
Bz
Bx
B
y



Ex
Ez
E
y

B

E
Figure 1. Quadcopter conﬁguration.
In addition, TE
B(Θ) and RE
B(Θ) represent the translational and rotational transforma-
tion matrices from the body frame {B} to earth frame {E}, respectively. These values can be
computed by
TE
B(Θ) =


CθCψ
SφSθCψ −CφSψ
CφSθCψ + SφSψ
CθSψ
SφSθSψ + CφCψ
CφSθSψ −SφCψ
−Sθ
SφCθ
CφCθ


(3)
and
RE
B(Θ) =


1
SφTθ
CφTθ
0
Cφ
−Sφ
0
Sφ/Cθ
Cφ/Cθ


(4)
where S(•), C(•), and T(•) represent the notations of sin(•), cos(•), and tan(•), respectively.
It is proposed to consider that the variations in the three Euler angles are unprogressive
maneuvers, meaning that the rotational behaviors of the roll, pitch, and yaw angles are
surrounding the origin. Thus, RE
B(Θ) is closely equivalent to the identity matrix, i.e.,
RE
B(Θ) = I3×3; Mgyros denotes the gyroscopic torque generated by the total residual angular
velocity of four rotors, i.e., Ω=
4
∑
i=1
(−1)i+1Ωi, i = 1, . . . , 4, effecting on a rigid body of the
vehicle, its value is given by:
Mgyros =
4
∑
i=1

Jr(ϖ × ˆe3)(−1)i+1Ωi

(5)
where ˆe3 = [0, 0, 1]T is a unit vector along the z-axis.
In addition, in order to design an efﬁcient control law for a quadcopter UAV, it cannot
ignore the undesirable inﬂuence of disturbances and/or uncertainties on the dynamical
system. Hence, Fdis =

ξx, ξy, ξz
T and Mdis =

ξφ, ξθ, ξψ
T are considered as the effects of
perturbations/uncertainties on the translational and rotational subsystems, respectively.

## Page 6

Sensors 2022, 22, 5082
6 of 20
From Equations (1)–(5), the mathematical model of a quadcopter UAV can be clearly
described by:



















(Q)
Translation
:



..x
..y
..z


=




CφSθCψ + SφSψ

fz/m

CφSθSψ −SφCψ

fz/m
−g +

CφCθ

fz/m


+



ξx
ξy
ξz



(Θ)
Rotation
:



..
φ
..
θ
..
ψ


=



.
θ
.
ψ
Iy −Iz

/Ix −Jr
.
θ Ω/Ix
.
φ
.
ψ(Iz −Ix)/Iy + Jr
.
φ Ω/Iy
.
φ
.
θ
Ix −Iy

/Iz


+



τφ/Ix
τθ/Iy
τψ/Iz


+



ξφ
ξθ
ξψ



(6)
In order to construct a robust backstepping controller-based ESDO for improving the
tracking performance of a quadcopter UAV, an equivalent MIMO control system under
the effects of disturbances and/or uncertainties can be described by a state-space model
as follows,
..
Z(t) = g(Z, t) + Υu(t) + ξ(t)
(7)
where Z ∈R6, u ∈R6, and ξ ∈R6 represent the vectors of system states, control input, and
lumped perturbations and/or uncertainties, respectively. Its detailed descriptions can be
given as follows,
Z = [z1, z2, z3, z4, z5, z6]T = [x, y, z, φ, θ, ψ]T
..
Z =
..z1,
..z2,
..z3,
..z4,
..z5,
..z6
T =
h..x,
..y,
..z,
..
φ,
..
θ,
..
ψ
iT
u = [u1, u2, u3, u4, u5, u6]T =

ux, uy, uz, τφ, τθ, τψ
T
ξ = [ξ1, ξ2, ξ3, ξ4, ξ5, ξ6]T =

ξx, ξy, ξz, ξφ, ξθ, ξψ
T
and the terms of g(Z, t) ∈R6 and Υ ∈R6×6 are given as follows:
g(Z, t) =


0
0
0
.
θ
.
ψa1 −a2
.
θ Ω
.
φ
.
ψa3 + a4
.
φ Ω
.
φ
.
θa5


, with











a1 =
Iy −Iz

/Ix
a2 = Jr/Ix
a3 = (Iz −Ix)/Iy
a4 = Jr/Iy
a5 =
Ix −Iy

/Iz
(8)
Υ =
 I3×3
O3×3
O3×3
diag(B)

, B = [b1, b2, b3]T, with



b1 = 1/Ix
b2 = 1/Iy
b3 = 1/Iz
(9)
The objective of controller design is to derive a robust backstepping control law guar-
anteeing a good convergence of the output state, Z, to the desired trajectory Zd ∈R6,
Zd =
h
zd
1, zd
2, zd
3, zd
4, zd
5, zd
6
iT
= [xd, yd, zd, φd, θd, ψd]T in the appearance of uncertain pa-
rameters and/or external perturbations. It can be seen that the quadcopter UAV is an
underactuated mechanical system because the vehicle has four control inputs
fz, τφ, τθ, τψ

but there are six degrees of freedom to be controlled (x, y, z, φ, θ, ψ). Hence, in order to
design a robust controller for a full dynamic system, the attitude control for Euler angles
(φ, θ, ψ), and position control for the three dimensions (x, y, z) are simultaneously con-
structed by using two separated subsystems (i.e., rotational and translational dynamics).
The attitude subsystem comprising roll, pitch, and yaw rotation is controlled by three
torques τφ, τθ, τψ (i.e., u4, u5, u6); the vertical position (z) is controlled by a control input uz
obtained from Equations (6)–(9) as follows:
uz = −g + (cos φ cos θ) fz/m
(10)

## Page 7

Sensors 2022, 22, 5082
7 of 20
Therefore, the aerodynamic force fz can be derived from the controller uz as follows,
fz = m(uz + g)
cos φ cos θ ,
∀φ, θ ∈(−π/2, π/2)
(11)
The remaining states of the control system (i.e., horizontal positions x and y), are in-
directly controlled through desired attitude states (φd, θd, ψd) and vertical control force fz
achieved from Equations (6)–(9) as follows:
 ux = (cos φd sin θd cos ψd + sin φd sin ψd) fz/m
uy = (cos φd sin θd sin ψd −sin φd cos ψd) fz/m
(12)
where ux, uy, uz (i.e., u1, u2, u3) are designed controllers for translational behaviors along x,
y, and z axes, respectively; the heading angle, ψd, is known parameters in advance.
In addition, φd, θd ∈(−π/2, π/2) are desired attitude angles generated from the
position controller term ux, uy from Equation (12), (φd, θd) can be computed as follows:
 φd = sin−1
m
ux sin ψd −uy cos ψd

/ fz

θd = sin−1
m
ux cos ψd + uy sin ψd

/( fz cos φd)

(13)
3. Robust Backstepping Control-Based ESDO
A robust backstepping controller based on an extended state/disturbance observer for
a quadcopter UAV is presented in this section in the following steps:
Step 1: ESDO is designed by using the second-order system to observe the unmeasured
system states consisting of the effectiveness of disturbances/uncertainties on the whole
control system.
Step 2: A full robust backstepping controller is derived by an integration of the approx-
imated values from the proposed ESDO to reimburse the negative effects of uncertainties
and/or external disturbances on a quadcopter UAV. In addition, a stability analysis is also
fulﬁlled to demonstrate a good convergence of the output states to desired trajectories.
During this procedure, the precise knowledge of the upper bounds of perturbations is
not required.
3.1. Extended State/Disturbance Observer (ESDO)
This subsection investigates a method to observe the unmeasured states of the vehicle
system including the lumped uncertainties and/or external disturbances. To derive an ESDO,
a MIMO nonlinear system is obtained from Equation (7) as follows,





"
..
Z.
ξ
#
=
 g(Z, t)
O

+
 [Υu(t)]
O

+
 ξ(t)
O

+
"
O
.
ξ(t)
#
y(t) = C1z(t)
(14)
It can be rewritten as the shorter form:
(
.z(t) = A1z(t) + B1g(Z, t) + B1Υu(t) + E1
.
ξ(t)
y(t) = C1z(t)
(15)
where z(t) =
h .
Z, ξ
iT
∈R12 denotes a new vector of output state and disturbance in-
cluded; A1, C1 ∈R12×12, A1 =
O6×6
I6×6
O6×6
O6×6

, C1 =
 I6×6
O6×6
O6×6
I6×6

; B1, E1 ∈R12×6,
B1 = [I6×6, O6×6]T, E1 = [O6×6, I6×6]T are constant matrices, and
.
ξ(t) is derivative of
the general lumped disturbance vector; I6×6 and O6×6 represent the identity and null
matrices, respectively.

## Page 8

Sensors 2022, 22, 5082
8 of 20
The time-varying extended state/disturbance observer for a quadcopter UAV is pro-
posed as follows:
(
.
ˆz(t) = A1ˆz(t) + B1g(Z, t) + B1Υu(t) + Γ1[y(t) −ˆy(t)]
ˆy(t) = C1ˆz(t)
(16)
where ˆz(t) =
" ˆ.
Z, ˆξ
#T
∈R12 is an estimate state vector of z(t); Γ1 ∈R12×12 is an ob-
server gain matrix given by Γ1 =
α6×6
O6×6
β6×6
O6×6

, with
 α6×6 = diag[α11, α1i, . . . , α16]
β6×6 = diag[β11, β1i, . . . , β16] ,
α1i, β1i ∈R+, i = 1, . . . , 6. Let eχ(t) =

e.
Z, eξ
T
∈R12 is an approximate error computed by
eχ(t) = z(t) −ˆz(t) as follows:
eχ(t) =
"e.
Z(t)
eξ(t)
#
=
" .
Z(t) −ˆ.
Z(t)
ξ(t) −ˆξ(t)
#
(17)
The performance of ey(t) = y(t) −ˆy(t) = C1(z(t) −ˆz(t)) = C1 eχ(t) is bounded when
the approximation error eχ(t) is bounded.
The stability of the proposed ESDO can be achieved through the observer error model
obtained by Equations (15) and (16) as follows:
.
eχ(t) = (A1 −Γ1C1)
|
{z
}
Φ1∈R12×12
eχ(t) + E1
.
ξ(t)
.
eχ(t) = Φ1 eχ(t) + E1
.
ξ(t)
(18)
where Φ1 = A1 −Γ1C1 ∈R12×12.
Obviously, it is always feasible to select constant values of α1i, β1i ∈R+, i = 1, . . . , 6
such that the matrix Φ1 meets the Hurwitz stability theorem meaning that the eigenvalues
of matrix Φ1, (i.e., λ = −λj < 0, j = 1, 2, . . . , 12), are arbitrarily located in the left half side
of the complex plane (LHP). Thus,
|λI12×12 −Φ1| =
12
∏
j=1
λ + λj
 = 0, λj > 0
(19)
Theorem 1. Let assumes that there always exist positive constants of δ, σ, ϕ ∈R+ in such a way
that the following expression always satisﬁes:
(
supt∈[t0,∞)∥
.
ξ(t)∥≤δ
∥eΦ1t∥≤σe−ϕt
(20)
where λmax{Φ1} = −ϕ < 0 is a maximum eigenvalue of the matrix Φ1. The observation error,
eχ(t) given by Equation (17), is strongly convergent to a small ball containing the origin zero if
the presented ESDO given in Equation (16) is selected to observe the system states and lumped
perturbations of a quadcopter UAV.
Proof of Theorem 1. The solution, eχ(t), of the differential Equation (18) can be easily
achieved by [39] as follows:
eχ(t) = eΦ1(t−t0) eχ(t0) +
Z t
t0
eΦ1(t−τ)E1
.
ξ(τ)dτ
(21)

## Page 9

Sensors 2022, 22, 5082
9 of 20
The inequality, ∥eΦ1(t−τ)E1
.
ξ(τ)∥≤∥eΦ1(t−τ)∥∥E1∥∥
.
ξ(τ)∥≤σδ∥E1∥e−ϕ(t−τ), is al-
ways satisﬁed with the assumption given in Equation (20). In addition, the term of
σδ∥E1∥e−ϕ(t−τ) is a positive scalar: thus, the bound of approximate error, eχ(t), can be
obtained as follows:
∥eχ(t)∥≤
eΦ1(t−t0)∥eχ(t0)∥+ ∥R t
t0 eΦ1(t−τ)E1
.
ξ(τ)dτ∥
≤σe−ϕ(t−t0)∥eχ(t0)∥+ R t
t0
eΦ1(t−τ)E1
.
ξ(τ)
dτ
≤σe−ϕ(t−t0)∥eχ(t0)∥+ σδ∥E1∥R t
t0 e−ϕ(t−τ)dτ
≤σe−ϕ(t−t0)∥eχ(t0)∥+ σδ∥E1∥e−ϕt
ϕ
R t
t0 eϕτd(ϕτ)
≤σe−ϕ(t−t0)∥eχ(t0)∥+ σδ ∥E1∥
ϕ

1 −e−ϕ(t−t0)
(22)
Due to e−ϕ(t−t0) →0,
t0 ≤∀t →∞, thus eχ(t) is bounded by:
∥eχ(t)∥≤δσ∥E1∥
ϕ
= µ,
µ > 0
(23)
The proof of Theorem 1 is completed. □
Remark 1. From the result in Equation (23), we can conclude that the observation error, ∥eχ(t)∥,
is ultimately bounded by a constant µ, if the observation gains α1i, β1i ∈R+, i = 1, . . . , 6 are
properly chosen such that matrix Φ1 satisﬁes the Hurwitz criteria. Therefore, ∥e.
Z(t)∥and ∥eξ(t)∥
are also convergent to a small region containing the origin zero, i.e.,
∥e.
Z(t)∥≤µ, ∥eξ(t)∥≤µ
(24)
3.2. Robust Backstepping Controller Design
In this subsection, a robust backstepping controller is constructed by a combination of
the approximated value from the proposed ESDO above and backstepping control tech-
nique to reimburse the negative effects of uncertainties and/or external disturbances on
a quadcopter UAV. The presented controller guarantees the convergence of the output
state, Z = [x, y, z, φ, θ, ψ]T, to the desired trajectory Zd = [xd, yd, zd, φd, θd, ψd]T. A gen-
eral scheme of the proposed controller for a quadcopter UAV is shown in Figure 2. Let
ez1 = [ez11, ez1i, . . . , ez16]T ∈R6, i = 1, 2, . . . , 6 deﬁnes a vector of real tracking error
ez1 = Zd −Z
= [xd −x, yd −y, zd −z, φd −φ, θd −θ, ψd −ψ]T
(25)
In order to derive a backstepping controller, an auxiliary desired state, Zaux ∈R6,
used for a virtual control system, is presented as follows:
Zaux = Zd + k1
Z t
0 ez1dt + k2ez1
(26)
where k1 = diag(k11, k1i, . . . , k16), k2 = diag(k21, k2i, . . . , k26), k1i, k2i ∈R+, i = 1, . . . , 6 are
diagonal matrices of controller gains.
Time derivative the auxiliary state is computed from Equation (26) as follows:
.
Zaux =
.
Z
d + k1ez1 + k2
.
ez1
(27)

## Page 10

Sensors 2022, 22, 5082
10 of 20
Desired Trajectories
(
)
,
,
d
d
d
x
y
z
(
)
,
,
d
d
d

1z
d
Z
Backstepping
Controller
1k
ESDO
Algorithm
2z
ˆξ
Control 
input u
Conversion
Translational 
subsystem
Rotational 
subsystem
zf
Dynamics of 
Quadcopter UAV
Z
+−


,
,
d
d
zf

→
u

Proposed
Controller scheme
,
,
T
x
y
z
u u u






,
d
d

External Disturbances
and/or Uncertainties
( )
,
,
,
,
,
T
x
y
z
t






= 

ξ
2
+
I
k
1
d
dt
z
−
−
,
,
T








Figure 2. General scheme of UAV’s control system.
Let ez2 = [ez21, ez2i, . . . , ez26]T ∈R6 denote a vector of virtual tracking error computed by
the following equation
ez2 =
.
Z −
.
Zaux
=
.
Z −
.
Z
d −k1ez1 −k2
.
ez1
(28)
From Equations (25) and (28), it can be seen that
.
ez1 =
.
Z
d −
.
Z
= −ez2 −k1ez1 −k2
.
ez1
= (I6×6 + k2)−1
|
{z
}
Ψ∈R6×6
(−ez2 −k1ez1)
= −Ψ(ez2 + k1ez1)
(29)
where Ψ ∈R6×6 is positive diagonal matrix given by,
Ψ = (I6×6 + k2)−1
= diag

1
1+k21 ,
1
1+k2i , . . . ,
1
1+k26

,
i = 1, 2, . . . , 6
(30)
Substituting Equations (28) and (29), the virtual tracking error ez2 is computed by:
ez2 =
.
Z −
.
Z
d −k1ez1 + k2Ψ(ez2 + k1ez1)
= (I6×6 −k2Ψ)−1
|
{z
}
P∈R6×6
 .
Z −
.
Z
d
−k1ez1
= P
 .
Z −
.
Z
d
−k1ez1
(31)

## Page 11

Sensors 2022, 22, 5082
11 of 20
where P ∈R6×6 is positive diagonal matrix given by:
P = (I6×6 −k2Ψ)−1
= diag(1 + k21, 1 + k2i, . . . , 1 + k26),
i = 1, 2, . . . , 6
(32)
The time derivative of ez2 is obtained from Equations (7) and (31) as follows,
.
ez2 = P
 ..
Z −
..
Z
d
−k1
.
ez1
= P

g(Z, t) + Υu(t) + ξ(t) −
..
Z
d
−k1
.
ez1
(33)
In order to stabilize the attitude control and also guarantee a good trajectory tracking of
position control for a quadcopter UAV, the proposed robust backstepping controller-based
ESDO, u(t), can be designed as the following equation,
u = Υ−1
 ..
Z
d −g(Z, t) + (I6×6 −k2Ψ)k1
.
ez1 −ˆξ(t) + (I6×6 −k2Ψ)ΨTez1 −k3ez2

(34)
where k3 = diag(k31, k3i, . . . , k36) ∈R6×6, k3i > 0, i = 1, 2, . . . , 6.
The stability analysis of the control system by using the controller u(t) is presented in
the next section.
3.3. Stability Analysis of the Proposed Robust Backstepping Controller
The stability analysis of the control system is presented in this subsection as follows,
Lemma 1 ([39]). Let h(t), W(t) : [0, ∞) 7→R. Then
.
W(t) ≤−εW(t) + h(t),
∀t ≥t0 ≥0
(35)
implies that
W(t) ≤e−ε(t−t0)W(t0) +
Z t
t0
e−ε(t−τ)h(τ)dτ,
∀t ≥t0 ≥0
(36)
for any ﬁnite constant ε.
Proof of Lemma 1. Let ϑ(t) ≜
.
W(t) + εW(t) −h(t), ∀t ≥t0 ≥0 deﬁnes a new auxiliary
variable. From the expression (35) can be derived ϑ(t) ≤0, and
.
W(t) is also obtained by,
.
W(t) = −εW(t) + h(t) + ϑ(t)
(37)
The solution, W(t), of differential Equation (37) can be achieved by [39] as follows
W(t) = e−ε(t−t0)W(t0) +
Z t
t0
e−ε(t−τ)h(τ)dτ +
Z t
t0
e−ε(t−τ)ϑ(τ)dτ
(38)
ϑ(t)≤0,
∀t≥t0≥0
→
W(t) ≤e−ε(t−t0)W(t0) +
Z t
t0
e−ε(t−τ)h(τ)dτ
The proof of Lemma 1 is completed. □
Theorem 2. Consider the disturbed dynamic system (7). The proposed controller presented in
Equation (34) can guarantee the ultimate convergence of the system output states of a quadcopter
UAV to desired trajectories, i.e., the trajectory tracking errors ez1,ez2 are bounded by a small region
neighborhood of zero.

## Page 12

Sensors 2022, 22, 5082
12 of 20
Proof of Theorem 2. A Lyapunov function candidate for the trajectory tracking error is
chosen by,
V(ez1,ez2) = 1
2ezT
1 ez1 + 1
2ezT
2 ez2
= 1
2
6
∑
i=1
ez2
1i + ez2
2i

(39)
It is easy to achieve the ﬁrst-time derivative of the function V(ez1,ez2) presented in
Equation (39) from Equations (29) and (33) as follows,
.
V(ez1,ez2) = ezT
1
.
ez1 + ezT
2
.
ez2
= −ezT
1 Ψ(ez2 + k1ez1) + ezT
2

P

g(Z, t) + Υu(t) + ξ(t) −
..
Z
d
−k1
.
ez1

(40)
Substituting the proposed controller, u(t), given in Equation (34), and matrix P in
Equation (32) into Equation (40) and doing some mathematical conversion steps, the value
of
.
V(ez1,ez2) can be obtained as follows,
.
V(ez1,ez2) = −ezT
1 Ψ(ez2 + k1ez1) + ezT
2

ΨTez1 −Pk3ez2 + P

ξ(t) −ˆξ(t)

= −ezT
1 Ψez2 −ezT
1 ( Ψk1)
| {z }
M∈R6×6
ez1 + ezT
2 ΨTez1 −ezT
2 ( Pk3)
| {z }
N∈R6×6
ez2 + ezT
2 Peξ
= −ezT
1 Mez1 −ezT
2 Nez2 + ezT
2 Peξ
(41)
where M, N ∈R6×6 are positive diagonal constant matrices, its values can be computed
from Equations (30) and (32) as follows,
M = Ψk1
= diag

k11
1+k21 ,
k1i
1+k2i , . . . ,
k16
1+k26

,
i = 1, 2, . . . , 6
(42)
N = Pk3 = (I6×6 −k2Ψ)−1k3
= diag(k31(1 + k21), k3i(1 + k2i), . . . , k36(1 + k26)), i = 1, 2, . . . , 6
(43)
In addition, the values of ezT
1 Mez1, ezT
2 Nez2, and ezT
2 Peξ from Equation (41) can be computed
from Equations (32), (42), and (43) as follows,
ezT
1 Mez1 =
6
∑
i=1
k1i
1 + k2i
ez2
1i
(44)
ezT
2 Nez2 =
6
∑
i=1
k3i(1 + k2i)ez2
2i
(45)
ezT
2 Peξ =
6
∑
i=1
(1 + k2i)ez2ieξi
(46)
Using Young’s inequality for |ez2i| and
eξi
, the following expression is always satisﬁed,
ez2ieξi ≤|ez2i|
eξi
 ≤1
2ez2
2i + 1
2
eξ2
i
(47)
From Equations (44)–(47), the derivative function
.
V(ez1,ez2) given in Equation (41) can
be obtained as follows,

## Page 13

Sensors 2022, 22, 5082
13 of 20
.
V(ez1,ez2) = −ezT
1 Mez1 −ezT
2 Nez2 + ezT
2 Peξ
≤−
6
∑
i=1

k1i
1+k2i ez2
1i

−
6
∑
i=1
k3i(1 + k2i)ez2
2i
 + 1
2
6
∑
i=1
h
(1 + k2i)

ez2
2i + eξ2
i
i
≤−
6
∑
i=1

k1i
1+k2i ez2
1i

−
6
∑
i=1

k3i(1 + k2i)ez2
2i
 + 1
2
6
∑
i=1
(1 + k2i)ez2
2i
 + 1
2
6
∑
i=1
h
(1 + k2i)eξ2
i
i
≤−
6
∑
i=1

k1i
1+k2i ez2
1i

−
6
∑
i=1
h
k3i −1
2

(1 + k2i)ez2
2i
i
+ 1
2
6
∑
i=1
h
(1 + k2i)eξ2
i
i
(48)
Let ρ, η ∈R+ be positive constants, which always satisfy the following conditions,
(
ρ = min
n
k1i
1+k2i ,

k3i −1
2

(1 + k2i)
o
η = max{1 + k2i}
,
i = 1, 2, . . . , 6
(49)
Hence, from Equations (24), (39) and (47)–(49), the below inequality always satisﬁes,
.
V ≤−ρ
6
∑
i=1
ez2
1i −ρ
6
∑
i=1
ez2
2i + 1
2η
6
∑
i=1
eξ2
i
≤−ρ
6
∑
i=1
ez2
1i + ez2
2i
 + 1
2η
6
∑
i=1
eξ2
i
≤−2ρV + 1
2η∥eξ∥
2
≤−2ρV + 1
2ηµ2
(50)
According to Lemma 1, the solution V(t) for inequality (50) can be obtained as follows,
V(t) ≤e−2ρ(t−t0)V(t0) + 1
2ηµ2R t
t0 e−2ρ(t−τ)dτ
= e−2ρ(t−t0)V(t0) + 1
2ηµ2e−2ρtR t
t0 e2ρτdτ
= e−2ρ(t−t0)V(t0) + ηµ2e−2ρt
4ρ
e2ρt −e2ρt0
= e−2ρ(t−t0)V(t0) + ηµ2
4ρ

1 −e−2ρ(t−t0)
(51)
From Equation (51), it is obvious, when t →+∞, the function V(t) is constantly
convergent by
V(∞) ≤ηµ2
4ρ
(52)
Theorem 2 is completely proven. □
Remark 2. From the result in Equation (52), we can conclude that the function V(ez1,ez2) is
bounded when t →+∞, and its value converges to ηµ2/(4ρ). It implies that the trajectory
tracking errors ez1,ez2 are convergent to a small region containing the origin zero.
4. Simulation Results and Discussions
In this Section, a numerical simulation is carried out to verify the effectiveness of the
proposed Robust Backstepping Control based on Extended State/Disturbance Observer for
a quadcopter UAV through a scenario of trajectory tracking test, where different types of
external perturbations and parametric uncertainties are considered. A comparative ﬂight
simulation between the proposed controller and other existent algorithms such as Sliding
Mode Control [26] and Active Disturbance Rejection Control (ADRC) [38] is conducted on
the same vehicle model with an identical working environment to emphasize the superior
performance of the proposed method. The physical system parameters of a quadcopter
UAV and the controller coefﬁcients to perform a numerical simulation are provided in
Tables 1 and 2, respectively, in which the controller parameters given in Table 2 are selected
to ensure the rapid response of the UAV system and minor trajectory tracking error.

## Page 14

Sensors 2022, 22, 5082
14 of 20
Table 1. System parameters of a quadcopter UAV.
Symbol
Descriptions
Value and Unit
m
Total mass of the vehicle
1.12 kg
l
Arm length of quadcopter UAV frame
0.23 m
Jr
Inertial moment of a rotor
8.5 10−4 kg.m2
Ix
Inertial moment around x-axis
0.0019 kg.m2
Iy
Inertial moment around y-axis
0.0019 kg.m2
Iz
Inertial moment around z-axis
0.0223 kg.m2
b
Thrust coefﬁcient
7.73212
10−6
N.s2
d
Drag coefﬁcient
1.27513
10−7
N.m.s2
Table 2. Controller parameters for simulation.
Parameter
Descriptions
Value
α
Observer gain of matrix
diag[2.5, 2.5, 2, 5, 5, 5, 5]
β
Observer gain of matrix
diag[100, 100, 100, 75, 75, 75]
k1
Controller gain
diag[25, 25, 35, 12, 12, 8]
k2
Controller gain
diag[18, 18, 35, 12, 12, 8]
k3
Controller gain
diag[0.1, 0.1, 0.1, 0.1, 0.1, 0.1]
Z0
Initial state value
[8, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0.1]
A scenario of numerical simulation can be described as follows: the quadcopter
UAV starts to takeoff from an initial state Z0 = [x0, y0, z0, φ0, θ0, ψ0]T = [8, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0.1]T.
A control mission of the vehicle is to drive the UAV’s position closely tracking a typical
desired trajectory given by Equation (53). During the working process, the ﬂight of the
quadcopter is inﬂuenced by randomly lumped perturbations.



xd = 5 + 5 cos t/
1 + sin2 t

yd = 5 sin t cos t/
1 + sin2 t

zd = 2
(53)
From the simulation result shown in Figure 3a,b, the tracking performance of the
proposed RBCESDO is signiﬁcantly better than that of the Sliding Mode Control [26]
and Active Disturbance Rejection Control [38] in both two-dimensional (2D) and three-
dimensional (3D) trajectories in general. According to Figure 3a, the RBCESDO algorithm
exhibits a rapid altitude achievement (z = 2 m). In addition, the horizontal position tracking
(x and y) also responds faster and more accurately than the other considered methods. As a
result, the vehicle position rapidly tracks the desired trajectory at x = 9 m, y = 1.5 m, while
the corresponding position is slowly convergent by using SMC and ADRC because of the
powerfully approximate capacity of the proposed extended state/disturbance observer.
Following the result shown in Figure 4, the undesirable lumped perturbations’ inﬂuence
on the attitude dynamic
ξφ, ξθ, ξψ

and on the position dynamic
ξx, ξy, ξz

are closely
estimated by
 ˆξφ, ˆξθ, ˆξψ

and
 ˆξx, ˆξy, ˆξz

, respectively. These approximated values are
integrated with the proposed backstepping controller given in Equation (34) to compensate
for the effects of disturbances/uncertainties. Thus, the performance of attitude states (roll,
pitch, and yaw angle) and position states (x, y, and z) of the proposed RBCESDO is more
precisely convergent to the reference trajectories compared with other methods as shown
in Figures 5a–c and 6.

## Page 15

Sensors 2022, 22, 5082
15 of 20
Figure 3. Performance comparison of SMC, ADRC, and RBCESDO in both 3D (a) and 2D (b) trajectory
tracking tests on a quadcopter UAV.
Figure 4. Disturbance estimation in attitude dynamic (a–c) and position dynamic (d–f) of the
proposed ESDO.
On the other hand, a general advantage of all three comparative methods (i.e., SMC,
ADRC, and RBCESDO) is to eliminate the chattering effect of the controller, as shown in
Figure 7. However, to remove the chattering phenomenon in the SMC technique, the high
gain parameters of the switching law must be avoided. Thus, the SMC controller cannot be
strictly guaranteed in both a tracking precision of the quadcopter UAV to a reference path
and a strong anti-chattering effect. In this simulation, the moderate switching controller
gains of the SMC method are selected instead of the large ones to ensure the anti-chattering
capacity, resulting in the larger tracking errors of roll, pitch, and yaw angles, and larger error
of positions are generated in comparison with the proposed RBCESDO method (as shown
in Figure 5d–f for attitude control and Figure 6 for position control), while these ﬂuctuation
errors are more ampliﬁed with ADRC control algorithm as exhibited in Figures 5g–i and 6.
To emphasize a significantly superior performance of the proposed controller compared
to the other algorithms, a convergence to zero of the attitude tracking error (φerror, θerror,
ψerror) and position tracking error (xerror, yerror, zerror) of the three considered methods
(RBCESDO, SMC, and ADRC) is also portrayed in Figures 8 and 9, which exhibit that
the proposed controller can obtain the best performance with the smallest tracking error
and fastest response. More speciﬁcally, the maximum of the attitude tracking error of the
RBCESDO reaches about Max{φerror} ≈0.00051 [rad] for roll, Max{θerror} ≈0.00079 [rad]

## Page 16

Sensors 2022, 22, 5082
16 of 20
for pitch, and Max{ψerror} ≈0.0013 [rad] for yaw (in Figure 9a), while the corresponding
values by using the SMC are 0.0064 [rad] for roll, 0.0075 [rad] for pitch, and 0.0015 [rad] for
yaw, and by using the ADRC are 0.033 [rad] for roll, 0.012 [rad] for pitch, and 0.0065 [rad]
for yaw. In addition, the position control of UAV is also highly improved as exhibited in
Figure 9b, the maximum tracking error of RBCESDO acquires about Max{xerror} ≈0.009 [m]
for x, Max{yerror} ≈0.0072 [m] for y, Max{zerror} ≈0.0002 [m] for z, while the correspond-
ing values by using the SMC are 0.22 [m] for x, 0.195 [m] for y, 0.0005 [m] for z, and by
using the ADRC are 0.6 [m] for x, 0.22 [m] for y, 0.005 [m] for z. In summary, the proposed
algorithm (RBCESDO) seems to provide a much better tracking performance for attitude
and position control compared to the considered methods in both rapid response and minor
tracking error.
Figure 5. Comparison of attitude performance between the proposed RBCESDO (a–c), SMC (d–f),
and ADRC (g–i).
 
Figure 6. Comparison of position performance between the proposed RBCESDO, SMC, and ADRC:
horizontal position x (a), y (b), and vertical position z (c).

## Page 17

Sensors 2022, 22, 5082
17 of 20
Figure 7. Comparison of the controller performance between RBCESDO, SMC, and ADRC: vertical
force (a), roll torque (b), pitch torque (c) and yaw torque (d).
Figure 8. Comparison of attitude tracking error (a–c) and position tracking error (d–f) between the
proposed RBCESDO, SMC, and ADRC.
Figure 9. Comparison of maximum attitude tracking error (a) and maximum position tracking error
(b) of the proposed RBCESDO, SMC, and ADRC.

## Page 18

Sensors 2022, 22, 5082
18 of 20
5. Conclusions and Future Works
In this study, a robust backstepping control based on an extended state/disturbance
observer for trajectory tracking is developed to improve the performance of the quadcopter
UAV under the various inﬂuences of uncertainties and/or external perturbations. In the
proposed algorithm, the ultimate control law is recursively constructed by using the ESDO
method and deﬁned auxiliary variables. The Lyapunov theorem is used to analyze and
prove the robust stability and powerful convergence of the system states to reference paths.
Finally, the numerical simulation is fully executed in both attitude and position control
mode; these simulation results are also compared with the Sliding Mode Control and Active
Disturbance Rejection Control methods to strongly conﬁrm the superior performance of the
presented control scheme in both desired trajectory convergence and anti-disturbance ca-
pacity. In addition, precise knowledge of the upper bounds of uncertainties and/or external
disturbances is not demanded during the steps of designing the proposed controller.
Another signiﬁcant contribution of the proposed algorithm comes from the real aspect.
The ESDO is able to estimate both the velocity state of the UAV’s system and wind speed
once these parameters cannot be directly measured due to sensor limitations. Thus, the
real implementation cost for data acquisition may be reduced, and the inﬂuences of sensor
noise are also removed. Future works are going to discover a ﬁnite-time convergence of the
system states to a desired trajectory.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, H.L.N.N.T. and S.K.H.; methodology, H.L.N.N.T., N.N.P.,
T.T.H. and N.X.M.; software, M.T.V. and N.X.M.; validation, H.L.N.N.T., N.N.P. and T.T.H.; formal
analysis, H.L.N.N.T.; investigation, M.T.V.; resources, H.L.N.N.T.; data curation, M.T.V., N.N.P. and
N.X.M.; writing—original draft preparation, H.L.N.N.T.; writing—review and editing, H.L.N.N.T. and
T.N.L.V.; visualization, S.K.H.; supervision, S.K.H. and T.N.L.V.; project administration, H.L.N.N.T.;
funding acquisition, H.L.N.N.T. and S.K.H. All authors have read and agreed to the published version
of the manuscript.
Funding: This work belongs to the project in 2022 funded by Ho Chi Minh City University of
Technology and Education, Vietnam. This research was also supported by the MSIT (Ministry of
Science and ICT), Korea, under the ITRC (Information Technology Research Center) support program
(IITP-2022-2018-0-01423) supervised by the IITP (Institute for Information & Communications Tech-
nology Planning & Evaluation), and Basic Science Research Program through the National Research
Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education (2020R1A6A1A03038540).
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1.
Hao, L.; Wang, X.; Zhong, Y. Quaternion-Based Robust Attitude Control for Uncertain Robotic Quadrotors. IEEE Trans. Ind.
Inform. 2015, 11, 406–415.
2.
Martinez Leon, A.S.; Rukavitsyn, A.N.; Jatsun, S.F. UAV Airframe Topology Optimization. In Proceedings of the 6th International
Conference on Industrial Engineering (ICIE 2020), Sochi, Russia, 17–21 May 2020; ICIE 2021, Lecture Notes in Mechanical
Engineering. Springer: Cham, Germany, 2021. [CrossRef]
3.
Yan, C.; Fu, L.; Zhang, J.; Wang, J. A comprehensive Survey on UAV Communication Channel Modelling. IEEE Access 2019, 7,
107769–107792. [CrossRef]
4.
Hu, S.; Wu, Q.; Wang, X. Energy Management and Trajectory Optimization for UAV-Enabled Legitimate Monitoring Systems.
IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 2021, 20, 142–155. [CrossRef]
5.
Zuo, Z. Trajectory tracking control design with command ﬁltered compensation for a quadrotor. Control Theory Appl. IET 2010, 4,
2343–2355. [CrossRef]
6.
Rinaldi, F.; Chiesa, S.; Quagliotti, F. Linear quadratic control for quadrotors UAVs dynamics and formation ﬂight. J. Intell. Robot.
Syst. 2013, 70, 203–220. [CrossRef]
7.
Raffo, G.V.; Ortega, M.G.; Rubio, F.R. Robust nonlinear control for path tracking of a quad-rotor helicopter. Asian J. Control 2015,
17, 142–156. [CrossRef]

## Page 19

Sensors 2022, 22, 5082
19 of 20
8.
Guerrero-Sánchez, M.E.; Hernández-González, O.; Valencia-Palomo, G.; López-Estrada, F.R.; Rodríguez-Mata, A.E.; Garrido, J.
Filtered observer-based ida-pbc control for trajectory tracking of a quadrotor. IEEE Access 2021, 9, 114821–114835. [CrossRef]
9.
Ricardo, P.A.; Javier, M.V. Adaptive control for quadcopter trajectory tracking with accurate parameterization. IEEE Access 2019,
7, 2169–3536.
10.
Li, C.; Zhang, Y.; Li, P. Full control of a quadrotor using parameter-scheduled backstepping method: Implementation and
experimental tests. Nonlinear Dyn. 2017, 89, 1259–1278. [CrossRef]
11.
Raffo, G.V.; Ortega, M.G.; Rubio, F.R. An integral predictive/ nonlinear H∞control structure for a quadrotor helicopter. Automatica
2010, 46, 29–39. [CrossRef]
12.
Alexis, K.; Nikolakopoulos, G.; Tzes, A. Model predictive quadrotor control: Attitude, altitude and position experimental studies.
Control Theory Appl. IET 2012, 6, 1812–1827. [CrossRef]
13.
Thanh, H.L.N.N.; Hong, S.K. Quadcopter robust adaptive second order sliding mode control based on PID sliding surface. IEEE
Access 2018, 6, 66850–66860. [CrossRef]
14.
Ha, L.N.N.T.; Hong, S.K. Robust dynamic sliding mode control-based PID-super twisting algorithm and disturbance observer for
second-order nonlinear systems: Application to UAVs. Electronics 2019, 8, 760. [CrossRef]
15.
Zheng, E.H.; Xiong, J.J.; Luo, J.L. Second order sliding mode control for a quadrotor UAV. ISA Trans. 2014, 53, 1350–1356.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
16.
Zhao, Z.; Cao, D.; Yang, J. High-order sliding mode observer-based trajectory tracking control for a quadcopter UAV with
uncertain dynamics. Nonlinear Dyn. 2020, 102, 2583–2596. [CrossRef]
17.
Gong, X.; Hou, Z.C.; Zhao, C.J.; Bai, Y.; Tian, Y.T. Adaptive backstepping sliding mode trajectory tracking control for a quadrotor.
Int. J. Autom. Comput. 2012, 9, 555–560. [CrossRef]
18.
Rodriguez, H.R.; Vega, V.P.; Orta, A.S.; Salazar, O.G. Robust backstepping control based on integral sliding mode for tracking of
quadrotors. J. Intell. Robot. Syst. 2014, 73, 51–66. [CrossRef]
19.
Moﬁd, O.; Mobayen, S. Adaptive sliding mode control for ﬁnite-time stability of quad-rotor UAVs with parametric uncertainties.
ISA Trans. 2018, 72, 1–14. [CrossRef]
20.
Yin, Y.; Niu, H.; Liu, X. Adaptive neural network sliding mode control for quad tilt rotor aircraft. Complexity 2017, 2017, 7104708.
[CrossRef]
21.
Labbadi, M.; Cherkaoui, M. Adaptive fractional-order nonsingular fast terminal sliding mode based robust tracking control of
quadrotor UAV with gaussian random disturbances and uncertainties. IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst. 2021, 57, 2265–2277.
[CrossRef]
22.
Lei, X.; Guo, K.; Ge, S.S. Disturbance observer-based control of small unmanned aerial rotorcraft. Math. Probl. Eng. 2013,
2013, 464938. [CrossRef]
23.
Chen, W.H. Disturbance observer-based control for nonlinear systems. IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron. 2004, 9, 706–710. [CrossRef]
24.
Xu, B. Composite learning ﬁnite-time control with application to quadrotors. IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. Syst. 2018, 48,
1806–1815. [CrossRef]
25.
Wang, F.; Gao, H.; Wang, K.; Zhou, C.; Zong, Q.; Hua, C. Disturbance observer-based ﬁnite-time control design for a quadcopter
UAV with external disturbance. IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst. 2021, 57, 834–847. [CrossRef]
26.
Derbel, N.; Ghommam, J.; Zhu, Q. Applications of Sliding Mode Control; Springer: Singapore, 2017.
27.
Chen, F.; Lei, W.; Zhang, K.; Tao, G.; Jang, B. A novel nonlinear resilient control for a quadcopter UAV via backstepping control
and nonlinear disturbance observer. Nonlinear Dyn 2016, 85, 1281–1295. [CrossRef]
28.
Thanh, H.L.N.N.; Hong, S.K. An extended multi-surface sliding control for matched/mismatched uncertain nonlinear systems
through a lumped disturbance estimator. IEEE Access 2020, 8, 91468–91475. [CrossRef]
29.
Liu, K.; Wang, R. Antisaturation command ﬁltered backstepping control-based disturbance rejection for a quadarotor UAV. IEEE
Trans. Circuits Syst. II Express Briefs. 2021, 68, 3577–3581. [CrossRef]
30.
Fu, C.; Hong, W.; Lu, H.; Zhang, L.; Guo, X.; Tian, Y. Adaptive robust backstepping attitude control for a multi-rotor unmanned
aerial vehicle with time-varying output constraints. Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 2018, 78, 593–603. [CrossRef]
31.
Das, A.; Lewis, F.; Subbarao, K. Backstepping approach for controlling a quadrotor using Lagrange form dynamics. J. Intell. Robot.
Syst. 2009, 56, 127–151. [CrossRef]
32.
Liu, K.; Wang, R.; Zheng, S.; Dong, S.; Sun, G. Fixed-time disturbance observer-based robust fault-tolerant tracking control for
uncertain quadrotor UAV subject to input delay. Nonlinear Dyn. 2022, 107, 2363–2390. [CrossRef]
33.
Shao, X.; Liu, J.; Wang, H. Robust back-stepping output feedback trajectory tracking for quadrotors via extended state observer
and sigmoid tracking differentiator. Mech. Syst. Signal Proc. 2018, 104, 631–647. [CrossRef]
34.
Chen, F.; Jiang, R.; Zhang, K.; Jiang, B.; Tao, G. Robust backstepping sliding mode control and observer-based fault estimation for
a quadrotor UAV. IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. 2016, 63, 5044–5056. [CrossRef]
35.
Zheng, F.; Zhen, Z.; Gong, H. Observer-based backstepping longitudinal control for carrier-based UAV with actuator faults. J.
Syst. Eng. Electron. 2017, 28, 322–377.
36.
He, M.; He, J. Extended state observer-based robust backstepping sliding mode control for a small-size helicopter. IEEE Access
2018, 6, 33480–33488. [CrossRef]
37.
Shao, X.; Liu, J.; Cao, H.; Shen, C.; Wang, H. Robust dynamic surface trajectory tracking control for a quadcopter UAV via
extended state observer. Int. J. Robust Nonlinear Control 2018, 28, 2700–2719. [CrossRef]

## Page 20

Sensors 2022, 22, 5082
20 of 20
38.
Zhang, Y.; Chen, Z.; Zhang, X.; Sun, Q.; Sun, M. A novel control scheme for quadrotor UAV based upon active disturbance
rejection control. Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 2018, 79, 601–609. [CrossRef]
39.
Petros, A.; Sun, J. Robust Adaptive Control; Prentice Hall: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 1996.
