# Tracking control and disturbance rejection of micro quadrotor via adaptive internal model.pdf

## Page 1

Systems Science & Control Engineering
An Open Access Journal
ISSN: 2164-2583 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/tssc20
Tracking control and disturbance rejection of
micro quadrotor via adaptive internal model
Bing Dai & Guizhi Meng
To cite this article: Bing Dai & Guizhi Meng (2024) Tracking control and disturbance rejection
of micro quadrotor via adaptive internal model, Systems Science & Control Engineering, 12:1,
2313322, DOI: 10.1080/21642583.2024.2313322
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/21642583.2024.2313322
© 2024 The Author(s). Published by Informa
UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis
Group.
Published online: 22 Feb 2024.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 657
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 2 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=tssc20

## Page 2

SYSTEMS SCIENCE & CONTROL ENGINEERING: AN OPEN ACCESS JOURNAL
2024, VOL. 12, NO. 1, 2313322
https://doi.org/10.1080/21642583.2024.2313322
Tracking control and disturbance rejection of micro quadrotor via adaptive
internal model
Bing Daia and Guizhi Mengb
aEngineering School, Harbin University, Harbin, People’s Republic of China; bSchool of Science, Harbin University of Science and Technology,
Harbin, People’s Republic of China
ABSTRACT
In this paper, to achieve attitude tracking and disturbance rejection of micro quodrotor in the pres-
ence of uncertain external disturbances, the output regulation technique is utilized. First of all,
the model that established regarding micro quadrotor is transformed to a stabilization problem of
the second-order augmented system by employing the internal model. Second, an adaptive inter-
nal model is designed via exosystem information. The nonlinear unknown functions of the system
are approximated by fuzzy logic systems, and the fuzzy adaptive laws are designed to tackle the
uncertainty parameters. Then the new adaptive fuzzy state controllers and adaptive control laws
are proposed by combining the backstepping technique and the adaptive control method. Unlike
the traditional controller design method, the proposed controllers and adaptive control laws are
designed respectively for roll angle, pitch angle, yaw angle and the height of the four-channel heli-
copter. Moreover, the new algorithm can perform well in attitude tracking and disturbance rejection
of the closed-loop systems. Finally simulation results have demonstrated the effectiveness of the
proposed approach.
ARTICLE HISTORY
Received 1 May 2023
Accepted 29 January 2024
KEYWORDS
Output regulation; adaptive
internal model; backstepping
technique; Lyapunov method
1. Introduction
In the past several decades, the problem of attitude track-
ing control and disturbance rejection for micro quadrotor
has received enormous attention. Significant efforts have
been made on designing and controlling the quadro-
tor (Comaniciu et al., 2003; Katsuya et al., 2014). Gen-
erally speaking, the flight controller design problem of
quadrotor can be handled by employing the following
two approaches: the linear control approach and the
nonlinear control approach. It is noted that almost all
control systems are inherently nonlinear and subject to
uncertainties and disturbances in practice. So a great deal
of attention has been paid to nonlinear control meth-
ods. Several nonlinear control algorithms, such as slid-
ing mode control (Ding et al., 2018), nonlinear feedback
control (Xiao et al., 2021), optimal control (Dong et al.,
2021), inverse optimal control (Hu et al., 2021), back-
stepping technique (Wen et al., 2019), adaptive control
(Zhang et al., 2023) and gain scheduling design method
(Lawrence & Rugh, 1995), have been addressed for deal-
ing with the attitude tracking control problem for space-
craft. On the other hand, adaptive backstepping control
scheme was developed (Xia et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2018). By
combining adaptive control with backstepping control,
CONTACT Guizhi Meng
menggz13@163.com
an adaptive backstepping control method for uncertain
nonlinear systems has been established (Soukkou et al.,
2022). In Katsuya et al. (2014), the adaptive tracking con-
trol is developed for a four-rotor mini helicopter with dis-
turbances based on backstepping control scheme. How-
ever, references (Ding et al., 2018; Dong et al., 2021; Hu
et al., 2021; Katsuya et al., 2014; Lawrence & Rugh, 1995;
Wen et al., 2019; Xiao et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2023)
do not consider the disturbance produced by an exosys-
tem. Especially, when the disturbance is generated by an
exosystem, the above controllers cannot deal with the
attitude tracking and disturbance suppression problem.
The problem of attitude tracking reference signals and
disturbance suppression that generated by an exosystem
is a special example of the output regulation problem.
The output regulation problem aims to design a con-
troller such that it can guarantee all signals of the closed-
loop system ultimately uniformly bounded and ensure
the output of the closed-loop system to track the ref-
erence signals and reject the disturbances. The internal
model is introduced in the controller design to solve the
output regulation problem (Francis & Wonham, 1976).
With the help of the internal model, some results have
been obtained regarding nonlinear output regulation
© 2024 The Author(s). Published by Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/), which permits
unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. The terms on which this article has been published allow
the posting of the Accepted Manuscript in a repository by the author(s) or with their consent.

## Page 3

2
B. DAI AND G. MENG
problems(Attaullah&Hassan,2010;Chen&Huang,2005).
The global output regulation problem for uncertain non-
linear systems was first reported in Serrani, and Isidori
(2000). It assumes that the exogenous signal w and the
unknown parameter of nonlinear systems belong to a
prior known compact set. Based on the adaptive control
method, an adaptive output regulator was established
in Gong and Lin (2003) and developed for nonlinearly
parameterized systems in Lin and Qian (2002). However if
referencesignalshavedifferentboundaries,thenthecon-
trol method will change. Considering the unstructured
uncertainties for nonlinear systems, intelligent control
methods are normally used for the control design (Che
et al., 2020; Jin et al., 2023; Tong et al., 2011; Xu, 2015).
A fuzzy logic system is considered as an effective way to
deal with t unknown functions in the controlled system
due to the global approximation ability (Xu, 2015). In this
paper, fuzzy logic systems will be applied to the attitude
control of quadrotor.
At present, there are some references concerning the
output regulation problem of attitude tracking control
and disturbance rejection. Based on event triggered con-
trol, an attitude controller is presented to improve com-
munication effectively and save energy (Che et al., 2020;
Tong et al., 2011). To achieve the attitude tracking control
of the quadrotor with external disturbance, a double-
loop control system is proposed based on integral sliding
mode control method and dynamic surface method (Gao,
2018). In Du et al. (2019), a dynamic surface internal mode
output regulator is proposed to circumvent a series of
problemsofquadrotorattitudecontrol.Nevertheless,few
studies exist on a quadrotor based on output regulation
with uncertain exosystem and nonlinear unknown func-
tions. The references (Che et al., 2020; Du et al., 2019; Gao,
2018; Tong et al., 2011) mentioned above don’t consider
uncertain exosystem.
Motivated by the above investigations, this paper
investigates the output regulation problem for a class
of uncertain nonlinear systems with unknown nonlinear
functions and uncertain exosystem. Compared with the
existing results, we provide our main contributions as
follows.
(1) Based on the theory of output regulation, the track-
ing errors of different channels respectively are con-
sidered. A new control strategy based on backstep-
ping technique is proposed for roll angle, pitch angle,
yaw angle and the height of the four-channel heli-
copter. The proposed adaptive fuzzy controllers and
the adaptive laws can guarantee that the closed-loop
system is ultimately uniformly bounded.
(2) An adaptive internal model is constructed to deal
uncertainties.
Compared
to
Bouabdallah
and
Siegwart (2005), the model that established regard-
ing micro quadrotor is driven by a linear exosystem.
This model is more general than the existing works
(Bouabdallah & Siegwart, 2005; Ding et al., 2018;
Dong et al., 2021; Hu et al., 2021; Lawrence & Rugh,
1995; Wen et al., 2019; Xiao et al., 2021; Zhang et al.,
2023). And the exosystem is assumed to be unknown,
that is, the linear external system contains unknown
parameters. Thus the existing control methods (Che
et al., 2020; Du et al., 2019; Gao, 2018; Tong et al.,
2011) become invalid. By defining the adaptive inter-
nal model and coordinate transformation, the stabi-
lization problem of the second-order augmentation
system can be implemented.
This paper is organized as follows. The problem
description related to the airframe dynamic model and
power system model is briefly given respectively in
Section 2 and Section 3. The design algorithms of the
internal model and the adaptive fuzzy robust controllers
are presented in Section 4. Moreover, the experiment sim-
ulation results are given and show the effectiveness of the
proposed method in Section 5. Finally some conclusions
are illustrated in Section 6.
2. Nonlinear dynamic mode of quadrotor
The nonlinear attitude dynamic equation of quadrotor is
as follows (Bouabdallah & Siegwart, 2005):
¨φ = ˙θ ˙ψ
Iy −Iz
Ix

−Jr
Ix
˙θ + ℓ
Ix
U2,
¨θ = ˙ϕ ˙ψ
Iz −Ix
Iy

+ Jr
Iy
˙ψ + ℓ
Iy
U3,
¨ψ = ˙ϕ ˙θ
Ix −Iy
Iz

+ 1
Iz
U4,
(1)
¨x = (cos ϕ sin θ cos ψ + sin ϕ sin ψ) 1
mU1,
¨y = (cos ϕ sin θ sin ψ −sin ϕ cos ψ) 1
mU1,
¨z = −g + (cos ϕ cos θ) 1
mU1,
where (φ, θ, ϕ) is the state vector, which presents three
Euler angles of the aircraft’s attitude (representing the
roll angle, the pitch angle, the yaw angle). In the inertial
coordinate system, (z, x, y) is also the state vector, which
points to the position coordinate of the quadrotor centre.
Ix, Iy, Iz are the body inertia along X-axis, Y-axis and Z-axis,
respectively. ℓis the lever, Jr is the rotor inertia, satisfy-
ing Jr = Jp −Jm, Jm is the motor inertia, Jp is the propeller
inertia. U1, U2, U3, U4 are the inputs of the system, U1 is the
linear control amount along Z-axis,U2, U3, U4 are the lin-
ear control amount respectively along Z-axis and the roll

## Page 4

SYSTEMS SCIENCE & CONTROL ENGINEERING: AN OPEN ACCESS JOURNAL
3
angle, the pitch angle, the yaw angle, which satisfying
U1 = b(2
1 + 2
2 + 2
3 + 2
4), U2 = b(2
4 −2
2),
U3 = b(2
3 −2
1), U4 = d(2
2 + 2
4 −2
1 −2
3),
where Ωi is the desired speed of the rotation, Ω = Ω2 +
Ω4 −Ω1 −Ω3 is an unknown uncertainty of the system,
b is the thrust factor, d is the drag factor.
To facilitate the design of controller, we let
x1 = [x11, x12, x13, x14, x15, x16]T = [φ, θ, ψ, z, x, y]T,
x2 = ˙x1 = [x21, x22, x23, x24, x25, x26]T,
xd = [x1d, x2d, x3d, x4d, x5d, x6d]T,
	f = [	f1, 	f2, 	f3, 	f4, 	f5, 	f6]T,
f = [f1, f2, f3, f4, f5, f6]T,
v = [v1, v2, v3, v4, v5, v6]T
=
 ℓ
Ix
U2, ℓ
Iy
U3, ℓ
Iz
U4, (cos x11 cos x12)
1
mU1,ux
1
mU1, uy
1
mU1

where 	f1 = −Jr
Ix x22, 	f2 = Jr
Iy x21, 	fi = 0, i = 3, 4,
5, 6. f1 = x22x23 Ix−Iz
Ix , f2 = x21x23 Iz−Ix
Iy , f3 = x21x22
Ix−Iy
Iz , f4 =
−g, f5 = 0 f6 = 0 ux = cos x11 sin x12 cos x13 + sin x11
sin x13,
uy = cos x11 sin x12 sin x13 + sin x11 cos x13.
By using the above equations, system (1) is converted into
the following system:
⎧
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩
˙x1i = x2i,
˙x2i = fi + 	fi+di + vi,
h = x1,
e = h −xd.
(2)
where i = 1, · · · , 6.di(i = 1, 2, 3) is the external distur-
bance driven by an exosystem and satisfying d4 = d5 =
d6 = 0,histheoutput,xd denotesthereferencetrajectory
for the system attitude, and e is the tracking error.
To solve the problem of attitude tracking and interfer-
encesuppressionandmakeallthesolutionsoftheclosed-
loop system ultimately uniformly bounded, the following
assumptions are done.
Assumption 1: Theuncertainty	fi(x1, x2)(i = 1, 2)inthe
system is bounded, and satisfies |	fi(x1, x2)| ≤ρi(x1, x2),
i = 1, 2, where ρi(x1, x2) (i = 1, 2) is the known smooth
function.
Assumption
2: The
disturbance
D(t) = [d1(t), d2(t),
d3(t), 0, 0, 0]T is generated by the following uncertain linear
external system:

di(t) = Di(wi(t)), i = 1, 2, 3,
˙wi = Si(ai)wi,
(3)
where wi = [wi1, wi2, · · · , wiq]Tis the external system signal,
with wi(0) = wi0.
Assumption 1 means that the external system signal
can be a collection of periodic signal components, such
as the constant and the sine waves. The parameter ai ∈
is parametric uncertainty of the exosystem, which is pre-
scribed as an unknown frequency size, Di(wi) is a known
smooth function, q ∈R is a positive integer,  is a known
compact set, and for arbitrary ai ∈, the eigenvalues of
Si(ai) are with zero real part and single.
In this paper, the output regulation problem is
described as follows: under certain conditions for any
x1(0) ∈Ω ⊆R3, w1(0) ∈W ⊆Rq,whereΩ andW areany
known tight sets containing the origin in R3 and Rq,
design a fuzzy state controller to make the solutions of
the closed-loop system be ultimately uniformly bounded,
and the tracking error converges asymptotically to an
arbitrarily small range.
3. Rotor dynamics
It has been stated that the rotors are driven by the follow-
ing DC motors (Gong & Lin, 2003)

M di
dt = u −Ri −kewm,
Jt dwm
dt
= τm −τd,
(4)
where M is the induction coefficient of electric motor, u is
the control input of system (4), which mainly contains the
motors voltage signal. i is the current of electric motor,
R is the internal resistance of direct current motors(DC
motors), ke is the back electromotive force constant, wm is
the motor speed, Jt is the rotary inertia which the whole
power system rotated around the motor shaft, τm is the
motor torque, τd is the motor load.
Becauseofthelowcoefficientofself-inductanceforDC
motors, system (4) is approximately substituted with the
following equation:
Jt
dwm
dt
= −k2
m
R wm −τd + km
R u,
(5)
where km is the motor torque constant.

## Page 5

4
B. DAI AND G. MENG
If the motors contain the thrust and reduction gear
box, then the dynamic system model of motor (5) is con-
verted into (6)
˙wm = −1
τ wm −
kd
ηr3Jt
w2
m + km
r u,
(6)
where τ represents motor time constant, and τ satisfies
1
τ = k2
m
RJt , kd stands for the resistance factor, η is the trans-
mission efficiency of reduction gear box, r is a reduction
ratio of reduction gear box.
4. Tracking control and disturbance rejection
4.1. Design of internal model and fuzzy logical
system
To solve the output regulation problem, the internal
model method is employed. We need to design linear
internal model independent of the external system. Thus
we make the following assumption.
Assumption 3 (Serrani & Isidori, 2000): There exists a
positive integer n and real groups b0, b1, · · · , bq−1 which
satisfy
Ln
Swα(w) = b0α(w) + b1LSwα(w) + · · · + an−1Ln−1
Sw α(w),
and P(λ) = λn −bn−1λn−1 −· · · b1λ −b0
is Hurwitz,
where L is the Lee derivative operator.
By Assumption 3 and the output regulation theory of
linear systems, we can choose a controllable matrix pair
(Gi, Hi), whereHi ∈Rqi×1, Gi ∈Rqi×qi have proper, fixed
dimensions and are Hurwitz matrices, and at the same
time ψi = iT−1
i
(ai) ∈R1×qi. Moreover uncertain exosys-
tem (3) can be immersed into the following system:

˙ηi = (Gi + Hiψi)ηi,
di(t) = −ψiηi,
(7)
Since ai is an unknown parameter, we know that ψi is
also unknown. Furthermore we can use
⌢ψi to estimate ψi,
hence the adaptive internal model can be designed as
˙⌢ηi = (Gi + Hi
⌢ψi)
⌢ηi −(GiHi + Hik2i)z2i −Hz1i,
(8)
where i = 1, 2, 3, z1i, z2i
are the given functions of
Equation (8), k2i is the constant which will be given later.
Next FLSs are introduced to approach unknown non-
linear functions in the controlled system (2).
The main part of FLSs is a collection of fuzzy If–Then
rules which can be expressed as: If x1 is Fl
1 and x2 is Fl
2
and · · · and xn is Fl
n, then y is Gl, l = 1, 2, · · · , L, where x =
[x1, x2, · · · , xn]T ∈Rn and y ∈R are input and output of
FLSs, Fl
i and Gl(i = 1, 2, · · · , n) are fuzzy sets whose mem-
bership functions are μFl
i(xi)and μGl(y)(i = 1, 2, · · · , n),
respectively. L is the rule member.
Based on the knowledge of fuzzy mathematics, the
output of FLSs is presented as
y =
L
l=1
¯yl
n
i=1
μFl
i(xi)
L
l=1
(
n
i=1
μFl
i(xi))
,
where yl = maxy∈RμGl(y).
The fuzzy basis functions are defined as
ϕl(x) =
n
i=1
μFl
i(xi)
L
l=1
(
n
i=1
μFl
i(xi))
,
and we can obviously see that 0 ≤ϕT
l (x)ϕl(x) ≤1.
Let θT = [¯y1, ¯y2, · · · , ¯yL] and ξ(x) = [ξ1(x), · · · , ξL(x)]T,
then the output of FLSs can be rewritten as y(x) = θTξ(x).
Lemma 4.1: 4.1: (Katsuya et al., 2014) Let f(x) be a contin-
uousfunctiondefinedonacompactset ∈Rn,thenforany
constant ε > 0, there exists an FLS such that
sup
x∈
|f(x) −θTξ(x)| ≤ε.
4.2. Control design
Because of the nonlinearity and strong coupling of micro
four-quadrotor helicopter, to reduce difficulty we design
the controllers respectively for the rolling channel, pitch-
ing channel, yawing channel and the height of helicopter
by the backstepping design and Lyapunov method.
First taking account of tracking error of subsystem
about rolling channel.
Let z11 = x11 −x1d. Choose the candidate positive
Lyapunov function V1 = 1
2z2
11 and differentiate V1 with
respect to the time t, and we get
˙V1 = z11˙z11 = z11(x21 −˙x1d).
Choose the virtual control β11 = −k11z11 + ˙x1d, where
k11 > 0 is a constant parameter to be given. Let z21 =
x21 −β11, we have
˙V1 = z11(x21 −β11 + β11 −˙x1d) = z11z21 −k11z2
11.
Coordinate transform is made as
˜η1 = η1 −
⌢η1 −H1z21,
and define the error vector ˜θ = θ∗
1 −θ1, where θ∗
1 is the
optimal estimation error vector.

## Page 6

SYSTEMS SCIENCE & CONTROL ENGINEERING: AN OPEN ACCESS JOURNAL
5
Choose the positive Lyapunov function as
V2 = V1 + 1
2z2
21 + 1
2r1
˜θT
1 ˜θ1 + 1
2 ˜ηT
1P1 ˜η1 + 1
2¯r1
˜ψT
1 ˜ψ1,
where P1 is a positive and symmetric matrix, satisfying
GT
1P1 + P1G1 = −2ℓ1I. Define ˜ψ1 = ψ1 −
⌢ψ1ℓ1 > 0, r1 >
0, ¯r1 > 0 are constants to be determined. Based on
Lemma 1, the uncertain function 	f1 can be approx-
imated by fuzzy logics systems θT
1 ξ1(x1, x2). Then the
derivative of V2 with respect to the time t is as follows:
˙V2 = ˙V1 + z21˙z21 + 1
r1
˜θT
1(−˙θ1)
+ (1
2 ˜ηT
1P1 ˜η1)′ + 1
¯r1
˜ψT
1(−˙ψ1)
= z11z21 −k11z2
11 + z21[v1 −˙β11 + f1 + 	f1 + d1)
−1
r1
˜θT
1 ˙θ1 −1
¯r1
˜ψT
1 ˙ψ1
−ℓ1 ˜ηT ˜η + ˜ηTP1H1(	f1 −θT
1 ξ1(x1, x2)].
(9)
Choose the following control and adaptive laws as
v1 =
⌢ψ1
⌢η1 −(k21z21 + z11 + f1 + θT
1ξ1 −˙β11),
(10)
˙θ1 = rz21ξ1 + r10(θ1 −θ10),
(11)
˙⌢ψ1 = ¯r1z21

⌢η1 −H1z21
 
+¯r10(
⌢ψ1 −
⌢ψ10

,
(12)
where θ10,
⌢ψ10 are initial values of θ1 and
⌢ψ1, r10, ¯r and ¯r10
are positive constants.
Substituting (8), (10)–(12) into (9), then we get
V2 ≤−k1z2
11 −k2z2
21 −r0
r1
˜θT
1(θ1 −θ10)
−¯r0
¯r1
˜ψ1(ψ1 −ψ10) −ℓ˜ηT
1 ˜η1 + z21(ψ1 ˜η1
+ ψ1H1z21 + 	f1(x1, x2) −θ∗T
1 ξ1)
+ ˜ηT
1P1H1(	f1(x1, x2) −θT
1ξ1)
(13)
Let
ε∗= 	f1(x1, x2) −θ∗T
1 ξ1, ε = 	f1(x1, x2) −θT
1ξ1.
Based on the Young’s inequality and the estimate for the
right-hand side of (13), we get
−r0
r1
˜θT
1(θ1 −θ10) ≤−r0
2r1
˜θT
1 ˜θ1 + r0
2r1
(θ∗
1 −θ10)2, (14)
−¯r0
¯r1
˜ψT
1(ψ1 −ψ10) ≤−¯r0
2¯r1
˜ψT
1 ˜ψ1 + ¯r0
2¯r1
(
⌢ψ1 −ψ10)2,
(15)
z21ε∗≤ℓ1zT
21z21 + ε∗2
4ℓ1
,
(16)
˜ηT
1P1H1ε ≤ℓ2 ˜ηT
1 ˜η1 + ||P1H1||2
4ℓ2
ε2,
(17)
z21ψ1 ˜η1 ≤ℓ3 ˜ηT
1 ˜η1 + ||ψ1||2
4ℓ3
zT
21z21,
(18)
z21ψ1H1z21 ≤ℓ4zT
21z21 + ||ψ1H1||2
4ℓ4
zT
21z21,
(19)
where ℓ1 > 0, ℓ2 > 0, ℓ3 > 0, ℓ4 > 0 are constants to be
given.
Substituting (14)–(19) into (13), we obtain
˙V2 ≤−k1z2
11 −(k2 −ℓ1 −ℓ4 −||ψ1||2
4ℓ3
−||ψ1H1||2
4ℓ3
)z2
21
−(ℓ−ℓ2 −ℓ3)˜ηT
1 ˜η1 −¯r0
2¯r1
˜ψT
1 ˜ψ1 + ε∗2
4ℓ1
+ r0
2r1
(θ∗
1 −θ10)2 + ¯r0
2¯r1
(
⌢ψ1 −ψ10)2 + ε∗2
4ℓ1
+ ||P1H1||2
4ℓ2
ε2 −r0
2r1
˜θT
1 ˜θ1.
(20)
where
k2 −ℓ1 −ℓ4 −||ψ1||2
4ℓ3
−||ψ1||2
4ℓ3
> 0,
ℓ−ℓ2 −ℓ3 > 0.
Choose
λ = min{k1, k2 −ℓ1 −ℓ4 −||ψ1||2
4ℓ3
−||ψ1H1||2
4ℓ3
, ℓ
−ℓ2 −ℓ3, ¯r0
2¯r1
, r0
2r1
}.
Let
ρ = r0
2r1
(θ∗
1 −θ10)2 + ¯r0
2¯r1
(
⌢ψ1 −ψ10)2
+ ε∗2
4ℓ1
+ ||P1H1||2
4ℓ2
ε2.
So inequality (20) can be rewritten as
˙V2 ≤−λV2 + ρ.
Let δ = ρ
λ, then 0 ≤V ≤δ + (V(t0) −δ)e−λt. It is
ensured that all the variables of the closed system can be
ultimately uniformly bounded. Similar arguments can be
applied to the case i = 2, · · · , 6, when we apply backstep-
ping design and the Lyapunov method to the pitching
channel, yawing channel and the height of helicopter, the
control and adaptive laws can be obtained as
vi =
⌢ψi
⌢ηi −(k2iz2i + z1i + fi +
⌢θ
T
i ξi −˙β1i),
(21)
˙θi = rz2iξi + ri0(θi −θi0),
(22)

## Page 7

6
B. DAI AND G. MENG
˙⌢ψi = ¯riz2i

⌢ηi −Hiz2i

+

¯ri0(
⌢ψi −
⌢ψi0

,
(23)
where i = 2, . . . , 6.
Note that
v = [v1, v2, v3, v4, v5, v6]T
=
 ℓ
Ix
U2
ℓ
Iy
U3, ℓ
Iz
U4, cos x11 sin x12
1
mU1, ux
1
mU1, uy
1
mU1
T
,
it is further obtained that
U1 =
m
cos x11 sin x12
v4, U2 = Ix
ℓv1,
U3 = Iy
ℓv2, U4 = Iz
ℓv3, ux = m
U1
v5, uy = m
U1
v6.
By virtue of
U1 = b(2
1 + 2
2 + 2
3 + 2
4), U2 = b(2
4 −2
2),
U3 = b(2
3 −2
1), U4 = d · (2
2 + 2
4 −2
1 −2
3),
hence we can get the formulas of rotor speed
1, 2, 3, 4, where
1 =

cU1 −bU4 −2cU3
4bc
,
(24)
2 =

cU1 + bU4 −2cU2
4bc
,
(25)
3 =

cU1 −bU4 + 2cU3
4bc
,
(26)
4 =

cU1 + bU4 + 2cU3
4bc
,
(27)
where b is the thrust factor and c is the drag factor.
When the speed of the instruction is achieved, the
input of DC Motors can be acted as the output of
1, 2, 3, 4 obtained from (24)–(27), and we can serve
the output ωm of D–C Motors as the input of system (2).
Therefore it is clear that the closed-loop system can bring
about tracking control and disturbance rejection.
5. Simulation results
In simulation, without loss of generality we assume the
external disturbance of system d1 = w11w12,d2 = d3 =
0, w = [ w11
w12 ]T is generated from the following
exosystem:

˙w11 = a1w12,
˙w112 = −a1w11,
where a1 ∈,  is a given compact set.
Choose the fuzzy membership functions as
μFi1(x1, x2) =
3

j=1
1
(1 + e5(x1j+0.6× i
2 ))(1 + e5(x2j+0.6× i
2 ))
,
μFi2(x1, x2) =
3

j=1
e−(x1j+0.4× i
3 )2
e−(x2j+0.4× i
3 )2
,
μFi3(x1, x2) =
3

j=1
e−x1j2e−x2j2,
μFi4(x1, x2) =
3

j=1
e−(x1j−0.4× i
3 )2
e−(x2j−0.4× i
3 )2
,
μFi5(x1, x2)
=
3

j=1
1
(1 + e−5(x1j+0.6× i
2 ))(1 + e−5(x2j+0.6× i
2 ))
,
where i = 1, · · · , 5. Then fuzzy basis functions are writ-
ten as
ξik =
μFik(x1, x2)
5
k=1 μFik(x1, x2)
, 1 ≤k ≤5.
Let ξk(x1, x2) = [ξi1(x1, x2), · · · , ξi5(x1, x2)]T, θi = [θi1, · · · ,
θi5]T, i = 1, · · · , 6. We can design the control and adap-
tive laws similar to (21)–(23). The parameters are cho-
sen as m = 0.75kg, ℓ= 0.25m, d = 7.5e−5N · m · S2, b =
3.13e−5N · S2, Ix = 19.688e−3kg · m2, Iy = 19.618e−3kg
· m2, Iz = 3.938e−2kg · m2, Jr = 6e−5kg · m2. The initial
state variable of the system is x1(0) = [30, 15, 30, 3, 4, 5]T,
the initial values of external disturbance arew11(0) =
0.5, w12(0) = 1. Furthermore we set  = [0.5, 3], a1 = 1,
θi(0) = [0.01, 0.01, 0.01, 0.01, 0.01, 0.01]T,
⌢ψ1(0) = [0, 0],
k11 = k12 = k13 = 4, k21 == k23 = 5, the length of simu-
lation time t is 15s.
Consider two cases as follows in simulation.
(1) Tracking control
Assumed that xd = [1, 1, 1, 10, 10, 10]T is the track-
ing reference value of system (2), and simulation results
are shown in Figures 1–3. Figure 1 shows the time–
response curve of the attitude angle. Figure 2 shows
the time–response curve of the position vector. Figure 3
shows the time–response curve of the rotor speed. From
Figure 1 and Figure 2, it can be seen that the state x can
track the reference value xd. It follows easily that the pro-
posed controllers and adaptive laws can achieve attitude
tracking of the closed-loop system.

## Page 8

SYSTEMS SCIENCE & CONTROL ENGINEERING: AN OPEN ACCESS JOURNAL
7
Figure 1. The time–response curve of the attitude angle when xd = [1, 1, 1,10, 10, 10]T.
Figure 2. The time–response curve of the position vector when xd = [ 1
1
1
10
10
10
]T.
(2) Disturbance rejection
Only taking account of disturbance rejection prob-
lem, we suppose that xd = [
0
0
0
0
0
0 ]T is
tracking aim of system (2), then we can have simulation
results such as Figures 4–6. Figure 4 and Figure 5 have
showed that even in the presence of disturbance the state
x can converge asymptotically to xd. Figure 6 shows the
time–response curve of the rotor speed. From the simula-
tion results (Figures 4–6), we can know that the proposed
controllers and adaptive laws can achieve disturbance
rejection of closed-loop system.

## Page 9

8
B. DAI AND G. MENG
Figure 3. The time–response curve of the rotor speed when xd = [ 1
1
1
10
10
10
]T.
Figure 4. The time–response curve of the attitude angle when there exists the disturbance.
6. Conclusion
The attitude tracking and disturbance rejection problems
of nonlinear systems driven by a linear exosystem with
unknown parameters have been investigated. An adap-
tive fuzzy state feedback control strategy has been pre-
sented.Byusingthecoordinatetransform,theproblemof
attitude tracking and disturbance rejection of micro heli-
copter is transformed into the nonlinear output regula-
tionproblem.Thenonlinearfunctionshavebeenapproxi-
mated by fuzzy logic systems, and the fuzzy adaptive laws
have been designed to deal with uncertainty parame-
ters. Furthermore, the output regulation problem is trans-
formed into a stabilization problem by employing the

## Page 10

SYSTEMS SCIENCE & CONTROL ENGINEERING: AN OPEN ACCESS JOURNAL
9
Figure 5. The time–response curve of the position vector when there exists the disturbance.
Figure 6. The time–response curve of rotor speed when there exists the disturbance.
internal model. The adaptive fuzzy state feedback control
scheme has been adopted by the backstepping method.
It is shown that all the signals of the closed-loop system
have been ultimately uniformly bounded. Tracking errors
can converge to any small neighbourhood of the ori-
gin by choosing the design parameter. Simulation results
have showed the effectiveness of the proposed controller
method.

## Page 11

10
B. DAI AND G. MENG
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).
Funding
This work was supported by Heilongjiang Provincial Natu-
ral Science Foundation LH2020F010 and Heilongjiang “one
hundred million” Engineering Science and Technology Major
Projects2020ZX10A03.
References
Attaullah, Y., & Hassan, K. (2010). Output regulation of nonlin-
ear systems using conditional servocompensator. Automat-
ica, 46(7), 1119–1128. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.automatica.
2010.03.015
Bouabdallah, S., & Siegwart, R. (2005, April 18-22). Backstep-
pingandsliding-modetechniquesappliedtoanindoormicro
quadrotor. Proceedings of the 2005 IEEE international confer-
ence on robotics and automation. 2247–2252.
Che, S., Gao, Q., & Ji, Y. (2020, July 27-29). Output regulation for
quadrotor UAV by event-triggered mechanism. Chinese Control
Conference.
Chen, Z., & Huang, J. (2005). Robust output regulation with
nonlinear exosystems. Automatica, 41(8), 1447–1454. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.automatica.2005.03.015
Comaniciu, D., Ramesh, V., & Meer, P. (2003). Kernel-based
object tracking. IEEE Trans Pattern Analysis and Machine Intel-
ligence, 25(5), 564–575. https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2003.
1195991
Ding, S., Zheng, W., Sun, J., & Wang, J. (2018). Second-order slid-
ing mode controller design and its implementation for buck
converters. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, 14(5),
1990–2000. https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2017.2758263
Dong, H., Zhao, X., & Yang, H. 2021. Reinforcement learning
based approximate optimal control for attitude reorientation
under state constraints. IEEE Transactions on Control Systems
Technology, 29(4), 1664–1673. https://doi.org/10.1109/TCST.
2020.3007401
Du, M., Gao, Q., & Ji, Y. (2019). The output regulation control
of quadrotor UAV based on dynamic surface control and
internal mode. Computer Simulation, 36(1), 34–38.
Francis, B., & Wonham, W. (1976). The internal model principle
ofcontroltheory.Automatica,12(5),457–465.https://doi.org/
10.1016/0005-1098(76)90006-6
Gao, J. (2018, July 25-27). Design of quadrotor control system
based on dynamic surface output regulation. 39th Chinese
control conference.
Gong, Q., & Lin, W. (2003). A note on global output regula-
tion of nonlinear systems in the output feedback form. IEEE
Transaction of Automation Control, 48(6), 1149–1054.
Hu, Q., Yang, H., Dong, H., & Zhao, X., (2021). Learning-based
6 DOF control for autonomous proximity operations under
motion constraints. IEEE Transactions on Aero Space and Elec-
tronic Systems, 57(6), 4097–4109. https://doi.org/10.1109/
TAES.2021.3094628
Jin, P., Ma, Q., Zhou, G., & Miao, G. (2023). Reinforcement
learning-based robust optimal output regulation for con-
strained nonlinear systems with static and dynamic uncer-
tainties. International Journal of Robust and Nonlinear Control,
33(3), 2022–2040. https://doi.org/10.1002/rnc.6475
Katsuya, H., Manabu, Y., & Tatsushi, O. (2014). Adaptive tracking
control of a four-rotor mini helicopter based on backstepping
technique. Transactions of the Society of Instrument and Con-
trol Engineers, 50(2), 177–184. https://doi.org/10.9746/sicetr.
50.177
Lawrence, D., & Rugh, W. (1995). Gain scheduling dynamic linear
controllers for a nonlinear plant. Automatica, 31(3), 381–390.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0005-1098(94)00113-W
Lin, W., & Qian, C. (2002). Adaptive control of nonlinearly param-
eterized systems: A nonsmooth feedback framework. IEEE
Transactions on Automatic Control, 47(5), 757–774. https://
doi.org/10.1109/TAC.2002.1000270
Serrani, A., & Isidori, A. (2000). Global robust output regula-
tion for a class of nonlinear systems. Systems & Control Let-
ters, 39(2), 133–139. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0167-6911(99)
00099-7
Soukkou, Y., Tadjine, M., Nibouche, M., & Zhu, Q. (2022).
Robust adaptive dynamic surface control scheme for a
class of single-input and single-output uncertain nonlin-
ear systems in strict-feedback form. International Journal of
Adaptive Control and Signal Processing, 36(11), 2938–2952.
https://doi.org/10.1002/acs.3486
Tong, S., Li, Y., & Li, Y. (2011). Observer-based adaptive
fuzzy backstepping control for a class of stochastic non-
linear strict-feedback systems. IEEE Transactions on Systems,
Man, and Cybernetics Part B Cybernetics, 41(6), 1693–1704.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TSMCB.2011.2159264
Wen, G., Ge, S., Chen, C., & Zhao, X. (2019). Adaptive track-
ing control of surface vessel using optimized backstep-ping
technique. IEEETransactionsonCybernetics, 49(9), 3420–3431.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TCYB.2018.2844177
Xia, J., Zhang, J., Feng, J., Wang, Z., & Zhuang, G. (2021). Com-
mand filter-based adaptive fuzzy control for nonlinear sys-
tems with unknown control directions. IEEE Transactions on
System, Man, Cybernetics: Systems, 51(3), 1945–1953.
Xiao, B., Cao, L., & Ran, D. (2021). Attitude exponential sta-
bilization control of rigid bodies via disturbance observer.
IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems,
51(5), 2751–2759. https://doi.org/10.1109/TSMC.2019.2916
839
Xu, B. (2015). Robust adaptive neural control of flexible hyper-
sonic flight vehicle with dead-zone input nonlinearity. Non-
linear Dynamics, 80(3), 1509–1520. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11071-015-1958-8
Yu, J., Shi, P., Dong, W., & Lin, C. (2018). Adaptive fuzzy con-
trol of nonlinear systems with unknown dead zones based on
command filtering. IEEE Transactions on Fuzzy Systems, 26(1),
46–55. https://doi.org/10.1109/TFUZZ.2016.2634162
Zhang, H., Chen, Z., Xiao, B., & Li, B. (2023). Fast fixed-time atti-
tude tracking control of spacecraft with prescribed perfor-
mance. International Journal of Robust and Nonlinear Control,
33(10), 5229–5245. https://doi.org/10.1002/rnc.6638
